<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html lang="EN" xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head><meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/><title>Gray's Anatomy</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../Style/Elsevier_eBook.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" media="only screen" href="../../Style/media.css"/></head><body><section role="doc-preface" epub:type="preface"><a id="pre00001"/><div id="CN"/><h1 class="fmtitle" epub:type="title" id="B9780702077050050011">Preface</h1><div class="para_fl" id="p0010">A common definition of a preface is that it is ‘<span class="italic">an introduction to a book, typically stating its subject, scope or aims</span>’. It is often the only place where an author or editor speaks directly to their readership, and in this respect, a preface is akin to an actor breaking the conceptual ‘fourth wall’ in the theatre or on film. In the Preface to the first edition in 1858 Henry Gray wrote that ‘<span class="italic">This Work is intended to furnish the Student and Practitioner with an accurate view of the Anatomy of the Human Body, and more especially the application of this science to Practical Surgery</span>’<span class="italic">.</span> Subsequent editions of <span class="italic">Gray’s Anatomy</span> not only upheld that intention, but developed it, in order to embrace and engage a wider readership.</div><div class="para_indented" id="p0015">The first two editors to succeed Gray were Timothy Holmes (1863–1880) and Thomas Pickering Pick (1883–1905). They both wondered in their Prefaces whether it was appropriate to include findings from the burgeoning discipline of anatomical science in a book intended specifically for students of surgery: ‘<span class="italic">so long as the Examining Bodies do not exact a knowledge of this branch of science as a necessary part of Medical Education, it would be unwise to encumber the pages of a work designed specifically for students with matter which, however interesting and valuable in itself, could hardly be regarded as essential</span>’ (Holmes, 3rd edition, 1863). Pickering Pick pointed out that microscopical anatomy had been revised in the 10th edition ‘<span class="italic">in order to keep pace with the ever-increasing activity of research in the branch of the science of Anatomy</span>’ (1883), and while not intending the 13th edition for the ‘scientific anatomist’, he was anxious not ‘<span class="italic">to disparage, for an instant, the study of Philosophical or Scientific Anatomy</span>’ (1893).</div><div class="para_indented" id="p0020">Future editions slowly assimilated findings in the fields of cell biology, embryology, neuroanatomy and imaging: just as the discipline it describes has evolved, so a book originally intended for students of surgery has morphed into the great reference book that is published today. Our current view of the detailed internal landscape of the body, from molecular to whole body and from conception onwards, owes much to the enormous technological advances that have taken place in the last half century. Our ‘anatomical gaze’ has been enlightened by progress in bioinformatics, molecular biology, experimental genetics, light and electron microscopy, diagnostic imaging (including X-rays, magnetic resonance imaging, computed tomography and ultrasonography), and the use of ‘soft’ perfusion techniques and frozen–thawed, unembalmed cadavers for dissection-based studies and surgical training. That gaze is not only informed by, but also informs, the design and negotiation of minimally invasive surgical access routes to structures and regions that were once regarded as inaccessible ‘tiger territories’. The momentum created by these changes powered the radical modernizing revisions seen in the 36th to 38th editions under the editorship of Roger Warwick and Peter Williams: ‘<span class="italic">The discipline of Anatomy has changed out of all recognition because it is no longer just “Descriptive and Applied”</span>’ (Editorial team, Preface to the 38th edition, 1995), and has continued to drive subsequent editions.</div><div class="para_indented" id="p0025">Terminological disputes have long entertained anatomists: ‘<span class="italic">one cynic has commented that anatomists would rather use each other’s toothbrushes than employ their terminology</span>’ (Tansey 1995).<a href="#fn1" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="cfn1"><sup>1</sup></a> Henry Gray’s anatomical terminology in the first edition can be little different from the language he used when teaching and operating at St George’s Hospital: his words were written long before the publication of the <span class="italic">Basle Nomina Anatomica</span> (BNA) in 1895. The exasperated comments of TB Johnston, in his Preface to the 25th edition, have a familiar ring almost 90 years later: ‘<span class="italic">It is my earnest hope that before another edition of this work is published, the question of terminology will have been settled and an unproductive subject will have ceased to occupy attention</span>’ (Johnston 1932). These hopes have not been entirely satisfied. An early attempt to reconcile differing terminologies in <span class="italic">Gray’s Anatomy</span> was described as ‘stultifying’ (Tansey 1995).<a href="#fn1" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref"><sup>1</sup></a> The text of the 42nd edition of <span class="italic">Gray’s Anatomy</span> is almost entirely <span class="italic">Terminologia Anatomica</span> 2-compliant.<a href="#fn2" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="cfn2"><sup>2</sup></a> However, on occasion the preferred term that is used is a synonym that may not be TA2-compliant: it has been chosen either because it is the agreed term in the relevant clinical consensus document or, as my editors frequently remind me, because it enjoys widespread clinical usage, whereas the TA-compliant term does not.<a href="#fn3" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="cfn3"><sup>3</sup></a> Wherever this occurs, all terms are included at first meeting, with synonyms in parentheses.</div><div class="para_indented" id="p0030">The use of eponyms is contentious: detractors argue that they are inherently inaccurate, non-scientific and often undeserved, while proponents point out that eponyms are deeply embedded in the anatomical and clinical literature and that they remind us of the giants on whose shoulders we stand. On balance, I believe that <span class="italic">Gray’s Anatomy</span> is an appropriate repository for anatomical eponyms: they are cited in parentheses on first usage of a preferred term in the text and an updated list of eponyms is available in the e-book for reference purposes. I recognize the irony in the exclusion of Henry Vandyke Carter’s name from the eponymous title of <span class="italic">Gray’s Anatomy</span>, particularly since Carter’s drawings invariably attracted praise: ‘<span class="italic">those excellent images which have … contributed so materially to smooth the thorny path of the student of human anatomy</span>’ (Carter’s obituary, BMJ May 15 1897); ‘<span class="italic">The splendid illustrations in Gray have long been known as the most effective and intelligible presentations of anatomical structure ever produced</span> …’ (Preface to the American 15th edition, 1901).</div><div class="para_indented" id="p0035">As a general rule, the orientation of diagrams and photographs throughout the book has been standardized to show the left side of the body, irrespective of whether a lateral or medial view is presented. Transverse sections have been drawn from below to facilitate comparison with axial clinical images: the conventional ‘top down’ orientation has been retained in diagrams in Section 3 (neuroanatomy). Clinicopathological examples have been selected where the pathology is either a direct result, or a consequence, of the anatomy, or where the anatomical features are instrumental in the diagnosis/treatment/management of the condition. Unless otherwise indicated, the photomicrographs illustrate human histology and embryology.</div><div class="para_indented" id="p0040">In the Preface to the 39th edition I explained that the editorial team had decided that, in order to provide the greatest benefit to clinicians, <span class="italic">Gray’s Anatomy</span> would better mirror their daily practice if anatomy was described in the way that they use it, i.e. regionally. That said, including regional and systematic descriptions of topographical anatomy has remained my goal and I am therefore delighted that the anatomy of the nervous and vascular and lymphatic systems is included in the online version of the 42nd edition (in <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X.xhtml">Chapters 80</a> and <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811.xhtml">81</a>).</div><div class="para_indented" id="p0045">Neel Anand, Marco Catani, Pat Collins, Alan Crossman, Michael Gleeson, Alistair Ross, Shane Tubbs, Richard Tunstall, Caroline Wigley and Stephanie Woodley brought a wealth of scholarship and experience as anatomists, cell biologists, research scientists, educators and clinicians to their roles as Section Editors. They recognize that a knowledge of clinically relevant and evidence-based anatomy is essential for safe and effective clinical practice across all specialisms. It is with great pleasure that I thank them for their dedication and enthusiastic support, both in selecting and interacting with the authors in their Sections and in meeting Elsevier’s deadlines, despite the ever-increasing demands on their time from their university and/or clinical managers. Richard<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="x" id="pagebreak_x"/> Tunstall and Caroline Wigley also worked closely with many authors to update the text and artworks for evidence-based surface anatomy and microstructure, respectively, across Sections 3 to 9. Tom Turmezei has been an enthusiastic ‘go to’ editor for sourcing images throughout the book: Tom and his team have produced a superb collection of additional labelled images (see <span class="bold">Bonus imaging collection</span>). Owen Arthurs and his colleagues at Great Ormond Street Hospital provided microCT images for Section 2 (Embryogenesis and development). Over a hundred highly experienced clinicians and anatomists have contributed new text and/or artworks, original micrographs or other images to individual chapters and I thank them all for their input – as ever, it has been an enriching experience to read their revisions.</div><div class="para_indented" id="p0050">I offer my sincere thanks to the editorial team at Elsevier, under the leadership of Jeremy Bowes, for their guidance, professionalism, good humour and unfailing support at all times. I particularly thank Trinity Hutton, Joanna Souch, Julie Taylor and Elaine Leek, for being at the end of a phone or available by e-mail whenever I needed advice or support. I thank the artists who have worked to produce new artworks under Richard Tibbitts’ leadership, continuing the tradition of Henry Vandyke Carter, the first great illustrator of <span class="italic">Gray’s Anatomy.</span></div><div class="para_indented" id="p0055">I dedicate my work on this edition of <span class="italic">Gray’s Anatomy</span> to my daughters, Helen and Caroline.</div><address><div class="fmauthor" id="augrp0010">Susan Standring</div></address><div class="para_indented" id="p0060">February 2020</div><section><a id="s9000"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle9000">Professor Emeritus Karl Zilles (1944–2020)</h2><div class="para_fl" id="p10010">It was with great sadness that we learned that Professor Emeritus Karl Zilles, who co-authored the updated chapter on the cerebral hemispheres (<a href="../B978070207705000032X/B978070207705000032X.xhtml">Chapter 32</a>), died while the proofs of this edition of <span class="italic">Gray’s Anatomy</span> were being finalized. He was an outstanding neuroscientist and ‘…<span class="italic">his dedication, rigor, and scientific approaches have been transformative in the field of neuroanatomy…’</span> (<a href="#bib4" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_4">Zaborszky 2020</a>). The quantitative histological methods that he developed have played a significant role in bridging the gap between classical post-mortem neuroanatomy and neuroimaging of the living human brain.</div><div class="para_indented" id="p10015">Karl Zilles graduated in medicine from the Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe University in Frankfurt in 1971 and received a PhD in Anatomy from the Medical School of Hannover in 1977. He became full Professor of Anatomy and Neuroanatomy at the University of Cologne in 1981 and was Director of the prestigious Cécil and Oscar Vogt Institute for Brain Research at Heinrich Heine University in Düsseldorf from 1991 to 2012 and the Institute of Neurosciences and Medicine at the Forschungszentrum in Jülich from 1998 to 2012.</div><div class="para_indented" id="p10020">During a long and highly productive career, Karl Zilles explored the structural, molecular and functional organization of the marsupial, rodent, non-human primate and human cerebral cortices. Very early, he introduced TV cameras connected to a microscope for extracting quantitative morphometric parameters from histological sections (<a href="#bib5" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_5">Zilles et al 1978</a>). The realization of the existence of significant inter-individual differences in brain architecture led him to propose and establish the use of 3D cytoarchitectonic probabilistic maps of cortical areas (<a href="#bib1" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_1">Amunts et al 1999</a>, <a href="#bib3" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_3">Schormann et al 1995</a>). The rapid development of <span class="italic">in vivo</span> neuroimaging methods combined with a quantitative probabilistic approach to cytoarchitectonic brain mapping produced reference atlases and digital databases for the precise localization of cortical areas and functions in the human brain (<a href="#bib6" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_6">Zilles and Amunts 2010</a>).</div><div class="para_indented" id="p10025">He developed a method for the quantitative autoradiograpical analysis of the laminar and regional distribution of multiple transmitter receptors. He introduced neurotransmitter fingerprints, which reflect the balance between different receptors and neurotransmitter systems that characterize each cortical area. He demonstrated that receptor fingerprints differ across species and between healthy and diseased brains, and therefore represent a very powerful tool to study the molecular architecture of each area under different conditions (<a href="#bib7" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_7">Zilles et al 1986</a>, <a href="#bib8" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_8">Zilles and Palomero-Gallagher 2017</a>).</div><div class="para_indented" id="p10030">In the last 15 years, Karl Zilles and his collaborators introduced an ultra-high resolution method for axon and white matter fibre visualization based on polarized light imaging (<a href="#bib2" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_2">Axer et al 2011</a>). Future developments and applications of this technique will offer an invaluable tool with which to describe the organization of neural connections in the brain and to validate current descriptions of white matter tracts based on <span class="italic">in vivo</span> diffusion MRI tractography.</div><div class="para_indented" id="p10035">To his students, collaborators and friends, Professor Karl Zilles was an inspirational and encouraging figure, always ready to converse and write about neuroanatomy, history of neuroscience, epistemology, philosophy and ethics: he will be deeply missed.</div></section><footer><section role="doc-bibliography" epub:type="bibliography"><a id="cebib0010"/><h2 class="reftitle" id="s0010">References</h2><section role="doc-bibliography" epub:type="bibliography"><a id="cebibsec0010"/><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib1"><!--<a hreef="#bib_1">1</a>. --><a id="ceotherref0010"/><a id="cetextref0010"/><a href="#bib_1">Amunts</a> K, Schleicher A, Bürgel U, Mohlberg H, Uylings HBM, Zilles K 1999 Broca’s region revisited: Cytoarchitecture and intersubject variability. J Comp Neurol 412: 319–341.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib2"><!--<a hreef="#bib_2">2</a>. --><a id="ceotherref0015"/><a id="cetextref0015"/><a href="#bib_2">Axer</a> M, Amunts K, Grässel D, Palm C, Dammers J, Axer H, Pietrzyk U, Zilles K 2011 A novel approach to the human connectome: Ultra-high resolution mapping of fiber tracts in the brain. NeuroImage 54: 1091–1101.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib3"><!--<a hreef="#bib_3">3</a>. --><a id="ceotherref0020"/><a id="cetextref0020"/><a href="#bib_3">Schormann</a> T, Dabringhaus A, Zilles K 1995 Statistics of deformations in histology and application to improved alignment with MRI. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 14: 25–35.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib4"><!--<a hreef="#bib_4">4</a>. --><a id="ceotherref0025"/><a id="cetextref0025"/><a href="#bib_4">Zaborszky</a> L 2020 Karl Zilles (1944–2020): a personal tribute. Brain Struct Funct 225:1185–1187. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00429-020-02088-5">https://doi.org/10.1007/s00429-020-02088-5</a>.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib5"><!--<a hreef="#bib_5">5</a>. --><a id="ceotherref0030"/><a id="cetextref0030"/><a href="#bib_5">Zilles</a> K, Schleicher A, Kretschmann HJ 1978 A quantitative approach to cytoarchitectonics. I. The areal pattern of the cortex of Tupaia belangeri. Anat Embryol 153:195–212.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib6"><!--<a hreef="#bib_6">6</a>. --><a id="ceotherref0035"/><a id="cetextref0035"/><a href="#bib_6">Zilles</a> K, Amunts K 2010 Centenary of Brodmann’s map – conception and fate. Nature Rev Neurosci 11:139–145.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib7"><!--<a hreef="#bib_7">7</a>. --><a id="ceotherref0040"/><a id="cetextref0040"/><a href="#bib_7">Zilles</a> K, Schleicher A, Rath M et al 1986 Quantitative autoradiography of transmitter binding sites with an image analyzer. J Neurosci Meth 18: 207–220.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib8"><!--<a hreef="#bib_8">8</a>. --><a id="ceotherref0045"/><a id="cetextref0045"/><a href="#bib_8">Zilles</a> K, Palomero-Gallagher N 2017 Multiple transmitter receptors in regions and layers of the human cerebral cortex. Front Neuroanat 11:78.</p></section></section><section epub:type="footnotes"><div class="ftnote"><hr/><p class="ftnote1" id="fn1" role="doc-footnote" epub:type="footnote"><sup><a href="#cfn1">1</a></sup> <a id="ntparantpara0010"/>Tansey EM 1995 A brief history of Gray’s Anatomy. In Gray’s Anatomy 38th ed (Williams PL et al eds). pp. xvii–xx. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone.</p><p class="ftnote1" id="fn2" role="doc-footnote" epub:type="footnote"><sup><a href="#cfn2">2</a></sup> <a id="ntparantpara0015"/>Terminologia Anatomica 2, 2019 <a href="https://fipat.library.dal.ca/TA2/">https://fipat.library.dal.ca/TA2/</a>; Terminologia Histologica, Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &amp; Wilkins, 2008; Terminologia Embryologica, 2017 <a href="https://FIPAT.library.dal.ca">https://FIPAT.library.dal.ca</a>; Terminologia Neuroanatomica, 2017 <a href="https://FIPAT.library.dal.ca">https://FIPAT.library.dal.ca</a>.</p><p class="ftnote1" id="fn3" role="doc-footnote" epub:type="footnote"><sup><a href="#cfn3">3</a></sup> <a id="ntparantpara0020"/>Jeppson PC, Balgobin S, Washington BB et al 2018 Recommended standardized terminology of the anterior female pelvis based on a structured medical literature review. Am J Obstet Gynecol 219:26–39.</p></div></section></footer></section></body></html>