<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Vascular and Interventional Imaging</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/Elsevier_eBook.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/media.css"/>
</head>
<body>
<section epub:type="foreword">
<div id="CN">
</div>
<h1 class="fmtitle" epub:type="title" id="for001titl">Foreword</h1>
<div>
<p class="fmauthor">David M. Yousem, MD, MBA</p>
</div>
<p id="p0010" class="textfl">I am happy to present the third edition of <em>Vascular and Interventional Imaging</em> of the Case Review Series featuring Drs. Wael E. Saad, Minhaj S. Khaja, and Suresh Vedantham for your reading pleasure. The authors have updated the vascular and non-vascular cases with the latest knowledge and procedures being performed in 2015 and reformatted the material for online education. The material will prepare residents and fellows for general radiology and interventional radiology-based patient care. The emphasis on physics, clinical evaluation, and treatment follows the new emphasis of medicine as espoused by The Joint Commission as well as the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education. However, for those who have specialized in this field, the book will also serve as a challenging review of the subspecialty.</p>
<p id="p0015" class="text"><em>Vascular and Interventional Imaging</em> is one of the most popular works in the Case Review Series. I am sure that this edition will continue that strong favorable history. Congratulations to the authors and to the readers, who will benefit from their wisdom.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>