<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Vascular and Interventional Imaging</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/Elsevier_eBook.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/media.css"/>
</head>
<body>
<section epub:type="preface">
<div id="CN">
</div>
<h1 class="fmtitle" epub:type="title" id="pre001titl">Preface</h1>
<div>
<p class="fmauthor">Wael E. Saad, MBBCh, FSIR</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="fmauthor">Minhaj S. Khaja, MD, MBA</p>
</div>
<div>
<p class="fmauthor">Suresh Vedantham, MD</p>
</div>
<p id="p0010" class="textfl">The Case Review Series provides an interactive case review format, which challenges the reader to demonstrate both interpretive accuracy and an understanding of the clinical relevance of imaging findings. As such, it could not be better suited to address the unique and dynamic challenges associated with learning interventional radiology.</p>
<p id="p0015" class="text">In the third edition, we showcase numerous diagnostic and therapeutic procedures, which are performed by the modern interventional radiologist. The image of interventional radiology held by typical radiology trainees often reflects only those few case types to which they have been exposed. However, the reader of this book will discover cases involving a broad range of arterial, venous, oncology, portal hypertension, and non-vascular procedures, and will observe their impact upon many disease processes. Included throughout the book, but specifically within the Fair Game and Challenge sections, are cases involving several very new procedures, which define the outer edge of interventional radiology knowledge in 2015. Our sincere hope is that the &#8220;impressive&#8221; display of this broad spectrum will stimulate trainees to explore the possibilities of subspecializing in this exciting field.</p>
<p id="p0020" class="text">Additionally, the reader will notice that a significant amount of presented material pertains to the proper <em>clinical evaluation</em> and <em>treatment</em> of patients. In our view, this material is critical in enabling the reader to develop and convey (to referring physicians or colleagues) a fundamentally mature procedure-related clinical judgment level, which every radiologist should possess. The speed with which interventionalists are adopting the practice patterns and responsibilities of our clinical colleagues in other disciplines is accelerating, and only a superb grounding in clinical and therapeutic principles will enable the modern trainee to keep pace.</p>
<p id="p0025" class="text">In the third edition, we have added several procedures that have developed and gained favor in the field of modern Interventional Radiology. We also have strived to add multiple imaging modalities to as many cases as possible in order to direct the reader&#8217;s eye to the findings across different types of studies. Finally, we have updated references and existing case discussions to reflect the current data in the literature.</p>
<p id="p0030" class="text">We certainly hope that <em>Vascular and Interventional Imaging</em> will prove to be a valuable resource for all current practitioners and trainees in Vascular and Interventional Radiology.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>