<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Vascular and Interventional Imaging</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/Elsevier_eBook.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/media.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="help">
<section>
<div id="Pi" epub:type="pagebreak" title="i"/>
<div id="CN">
</div>
<h1 class="fmtitle" epub:type="title" id="ctr001titl">Series Page</h1>
<p id="p9000" class="para_fl"><strong>Series Editor</strong></p>
<p id="p9010" class="para_fl"><strong>David M. Yousem, MD, MBA</strong></p>
<p id="p9015" class="para_fl">Professor of Radiology, Director of Neuroradiology, Russell H. Morgan Department of Radiology and Radiological Science, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland</p>
<p id="p9020" class="para_fl"><strong>Other Volumes in the CASE REVIEW Series</strong></p>
<p id="p9025" class="para_fl">Brain Imaging, Second Edition</p>
<p id="p9030" class="para_fl">Breast Imaging, Second Edition</p>
<p id="p9035" class="para_fl">Cardiac Imaging, Second Edition</p>
<p id="p9040" class="para_fl">Duke Review of MRI Principles</p>
<p id="p9045" class="para_fl">Emergency Radiology</p>
<p id="p9050" class="para_fl">Gastrointestinal Imaging, Third Edition</p>
<p id="p9055" class="para_fl">General and Vascular Ultrasound, Second Edition</p>
<p id="p9060" class="para_fl">Head and Neck Imaging, Fourth Edition</p>
<p id="p9065" class="para_fl">Musculoskeletal Imaging, Second Edition</p>
<p id="p9070" class="para_fl">Nuclear Medicine, Second Edition</p>
<p id="p9075" class="para_fl">Obstetric and Gynecologic Ultrasound, Third Edition</p>
<p id="p9080" class="para_fl">Pediatric Imaging, Second Edition</p>
<p id="p9085" class="para_fl">Spine Imaging, Third Edition</p>
<p id="p9090" class="para_fl">Thoracic Imaging, Second Edition</p>
<p id="p9095" class="para_fl">Vascular and Interventional Imaging, Second Edition</p>
<p id="p9100" class="para_fl"><strong>Series Foreword</strong></p>
<p id="p9105" class="para_fl">I have been very gratified by the popularity and positive feedback that the authors of the Case Review series have received on the publication of their volumes. Reviews in journals and online sites as well as word-of-mouth comments have been uniformly favorable. The authors have done an outstanding job in filling the niche of an affordable, easy-to-access, case-based learning tool that supplements the material in The Requisites series. I have been told by residents, fellows, and practicing radiologists that the Case Review series books are the ideal means for studying for rotations and clinical practice.</p>
<p id="p9110" class="para_fl">Although some students learn best in a non-interactive study book mode, others need the anxiety or excitement of being quizzed. The selected format for the Case Review series (which consists of showing a few images needed to construct a differential diagnosis and then asking a few clinical and imaging questions) was designed to simulate the board examination experience. The only difference is that the Case Review books provide the correct answer and immediate feedback. The limit and range of the reader's knowledge are tested through scaled cases ranging from relatively easy to very hard. The Case Review series also offers feedback on the answers, a brief discussion of each case, a link back to the pertinent The Requisites volume, and up-to-date references from the literature. In addition, we have recently included labeled figures, figure legends, and supplemental figures in a new section at the end of the book, which provide the reader more information about the case and diagnosis.</p>
<p id="p9115" class="para_fl">Because of the popularity of online learning, we have been rolling out new editions on the web. The Case Reviews are now hosted online at <a href="https://expertconsult.inkling.com">https://expertconsult.inkling.com</a>. The interactive test-taking format allows users to get real-time feedback, &#8220;pinch-and-zoom&#8221; figures for easier viewing, and links to supplemental figures and online references. Personally, I am very excited about the future. Join us.</p>
<p id="p9120" class="para_fl"><em>David M. Yousem</em></p>
</section>
</body>
</html>