<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html lang="EN" xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head><meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/><title>Gray's Anatomy</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../Style/Elsevier_eBook.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" media="only screen" href="../../Style/media.css"/></head><body><section role="doc-chapter" epub:type="chapter"><div id="CN"><a id="c0091"/></div><h1 class="chaptitle" epub:type="title" id="B9780702077050000914">Commentary 6.2: The anatomy and variation of the coracoid attachment of the subclavius muscle and its relation to the clavi-coraco-axillary aponeurosis</h1><address><div class="chapau" id="augrp0010">Simon Lambert</div></address><section><div class="textfl" id="p0015">The classic descriptions of the gross anatomy of the subclavius muscle in humans agree that it originates at the junction of the first rib and first costal cartilage immediately lateral to the costoclavicular ligament (<a href="#bib1" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_1">Cave 1961</a>), and inserts into the subclavian groove on the inferior surface of the clavicle, limited laterally by the conoid tubercle and terminating between the coracoclavicular ligaments. Additional, variable, insertions onto the coracoid process have also been noted. In one description, the lateral part of subclavius was separated into a superomedial part inserted, as usual, onto the inferior surface of the clavicle and an inferolateral part inserted onto the root of the coracoid process in 12 (16.8%) of 72 cases (<a href="#bib12" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_12">Mori 1964</a>). Several anatomical variations (largely duplications) have been reported (<a href="#bib9" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_9">Le Double 1897</a>, <a href="#bib4" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_4">Georgiev and Jelev 2009</a>, <a href="#bib14" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_14">Ozcakar et al 2010</a>, <a href="#bib18" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_18">Yun et al 2018</a>), of which the subclavius posticus appears to be the commonest (<a href="#bib3" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_3">Cogar et al 2015</a>). This aberrant muscle may play a role in more proximal neurogenic thoracic outlet syndromes (<a href="#bib5" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_5">Hasan and Romeo 2001</a>, <a href="#bib14" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Ozcakar et al 2010</a>, <a href="#bib15" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_15">Piyawinijwong and Sirisathira 2010</a>, <a href="#bib13" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_13">Muellner et al 2015</a>), as well as being of relevance to cannulation of the subclavian vein (<a href="#bib7" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_7">Kawagishi et al 2016</a>) and venous occlusion syndromes (<a href="#bib11" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_11">McCleery et al 1951</a>, <a href="#bib10" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_10">Lusskin et al 1967</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0020">During a surgical anatomy programme conducted at the Division of Clinical and Functional Anatomy at the Medical University of Innsbruck in 2017 it was noted that, in many dissections, additional fibrous structures contiguous with, and extending from, the epimysial fascia of subclavius were inserted into the base, medial margin and tip of the coracoid process. This suggested, first, that anatomical variations of the insertion of subclavius onto the coracoid are more common than previously reported, and second, that the function of subclavius is more subtle than simply that of stabilizing the clavicle at the sternoclavicular joint (SCJ) as previously thought (<a href="#bib16" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_16">Reis et al 1979</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0025">In a series of subsequent dissections of 52 adult shoulders, the anatomy of the <span class="italic">origin</span> of subclavius was constant and there were no additional medial musculotendinous attachments. However, 23% of the specimens had some form of variation in the anatomy of the <span class="italic">muscular</span> part of subclavius. These included an <span class="italic">additional</span> muscular belly (i.e. a duplication rather than a substitution anomaly) inserting into the superior border of the scapula adjacent to the origin of omohyoid, consistent with the previously described subclavius posticus (two specimens); an additional muscular insertion to the clavicle (i.e. subclavius appeared to be bicipital) (seven specimens); the muscular part of subclavius extending directly to the body of the coracoid process; an additional muscular insertion at the base of the coracoid process; and an additional muscular insertion onto the glenohumeral joint capsule. Subclavius was perforated in one specimen by a venous plexus, but no other anomalies of the subclavian vein were noted in this, or other, cases.</div><div class="text" id="p0030">Conversely, the anatomy of the coracoid <span class="italic">insertion</span> fibres was highly variable. Three shoulders did not have any extension to the coracoid process. In the other shoulders (94%) subclavius had a lateral extension that took one of three basic forms: a single strong cord-like band (37%); a planar twisted sheet-like structure attached along the medial side of the base of the coracoid process and extending to the body of the process, <span class="italic">discrete from the clavipectoral fascia</span> (32%); and a small, thin cord-like structure (24%). In two specimens, the cord-like structure was duplicated with one band passing deeply to the base of the coracoid process. The small fibrous extensions were often multiple, suggesting that they were a derivative form of a (perforated) planar sheet. Whatever their configuration, the fibrous structures comprised shiny, parallel-orientated fibres, resembling an aponeurosis.</div><div class="text" id="p0035">There was a clear gender difference in the form of the aponeurosis, but no side difference. In male specimens there were thick cord-like structures in 14/24 (58%) dissections and a twisted sheet form in 11/24 (46%) dissections. In female specimens cord-like structures were present in 9/28 (32%), and a twisted sheet structure in 5/28 (18%).</div><div class="text" id="p0040">The mean length of the insertion of subclavius into the subclavian groove was relatively constant, occupying, as a ratio of the clavicular length, approximately 38% (male) to 41% (female) of the inferior surface of the clavicle. However, there was a wide range of actual lengths of the insertion into the groove, varying up to 4.5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm in total length. The form of the aponeurotic extension (robust cord, small cord, or twisted sheet) did not correlate with a particular range of lengths of the insertion of subclavius into the clavicle. The most lateral point of insertion of subclavius into the clavicle was further from the muscular origin the longer the overall clavicular insertion into the groove, but there was no correlation with the form of the aponeurotic extension: this also held true for the coracoid insertion of the aponeurosis (when one was present).</div><div class="text" id="p0045">The nerve to subclavius was identified and dissected in 44 of 52 specimens, while the artery was seen in only 19 of 52 dissections. The nerve entered the muscle belly at a mean of 50% of the length of the muscle (from its origin) in the right specimens in females, and at a mean of 54% in the left specimens, while in the males the nerve entered the muscle at a mean of 59% of the muscle length on the right, and 54% on the left. These observations concur with those of <a href="#bib6" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_6">Jeon et al (2018)</a>, where the artery to subclavius could be defined as it entered the muscle with the nerve.</div><div class="text" id="p0050">The anatomy of subclavius and its <span class="italic">intrinsic</span> tendon structure have been elucidated by <a href="#bib2" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_2">Cave and Warwick Brown (1952)</a>, who acknowledged the prior contribution of French anatomists to the description of the muscle and its relations. Their description corresponds to the structures seen in this series of dissections as the aponeurosis of extension of the subclavius fascia in its various forms, but discrete from the clavipectoral fascia. <a href="#bib17" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_17">Testut (1904)</a> illustrated the anatomy of subclavius in relation to the ‘clavi-coraco-axillary aponeurosis’. A fascinating illustration in his text shows the tip of the coracoid process held within this extensive aponeurosis, which extended from the clavicle deep to pectoralis major to the upper part of the humerus, enveloping subclavius, pectoralis minor, coracobrachialis and the short head of biceps brachii from superiorly to inferolaterally. The coracoid process is thus suspended from the clavicle, and the trajectory of coracoid motion guided by the muscles enveloped by the clavipectoral fascia.</div><div class="text" id="p0055">The strong cord-like form described here would appear to be an extension of the pars paramuscularis and forms a strong, concave inferior border to the musculo-aponeurotic structure bridging the first rib, the clavicle and the coracoid process. Importantly, this structure therefore bridges two joints (the sternoclavicular and scapulo- (acromio-) clavicular joints). The tendinous border is relatively inelastic, although deformable. This suggests that subclavius might actually function to pre-tension the pars paramuscularis and aponeurosis of extension, contributing to the control of the motion of the distal clavicle as an antagonist of the primary scapular motion muscles. A corollary to this suggestion is that the <span class="italic">functional</span> anatomy of subclavius might be better ‘viewed’ from the perspective of the clavicle (with the coracoid below it) rather than from the perspective of the observer (who sees the coracoid with the clavicle above it, and so presumes the function of subclavius is to limit movement at the sternoclavicular joint in relation to elevation, and pro-retraction, of the scapula). The nomenclature of the <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="986.e4" id="pagebreak_986.e4"/>origin and insertion of subclavius persuades the observer that the muscle acts <span class="italic">on</span> the clavicle. However, the fact that the nerve to subclavius enters midway along its length <span class="italic">suggests</span> that the muscle contracts towards its centre. If this is so, then the muscle acts with the clavicle as its origin or base, and inserts onto its own robust tendinous border, attached medially to the first rib, and laterally to the coracoid and/or into the clavi-coraco-axillary aponeurosis in order to brace (pre-tension) the upper part of that aponeurosis during movement of the upper limb.</div><div class="text" id="p0060">Subclavius and its lateral aponeurotic extension therefore form the superior element of a ‘functional system’ that contributes to the control of the position of the scapula in relation to the thorax (i.e. at the scapulothoracic ‘joint’) in a manner synonymous with all other articulations (i.e. there are at least two articulating surfaces whose relative movement is generated by muscular action, the range, arc and trajectory of which are determined by capsular or, in the case of the scapulothoracic joint, aponeurotic, restraints).</div><div class="text" id="p0065">Our study in Innsbruck found the aponeurotic extension to be more common than previously documented (<a href="#bib12" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Mori 1964</a>). If only the strong cord-like lateral fibrous extension is considered, then the frequency of that form in our series remains greater (35%) than previously described in a Japanese series (<a href="#bib12" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Mori 1964</a>). We considered the twisted planar sheet-like aponeurosis, present in 31% of specimens, to be a variant (possibly an archetype) of this lateral extension, and not simply a fascial septum from the clavipectoral fascia. It is unclear why there should be a gender difference in the form of the lateral extension.</div><div class="text" id="p0070">The function of subclavius in humans has been assumed to be that of stabilizing the sternoclavicular and acromioclavicular joints (<a href="#bib16" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Reis et al 1979</a>). However, evidence suggests that muscle functions to regulate the output of kinetic energy in movement of the upper extremity rather than as a primary stabilizer of either the sternoclavicular or acromioclavicular joint. That the nerve to subclavius serves no other muscle suggests that subclavius has, or had, an important role in efficient brachiation, the modern equivalent being of overhead (sport-related) movements. Extending the muscle through a strong aponeurosis to the coracoid process (and so the scapula) would enhance this function.</div><section role="doc-acknowledgments" epub:type="acknowledgments"><a id="ack0010"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle0010">Acknowledgement</h2><div class="textfl" id="p0010">The author is indebted to his co-workers at the Institute of Anatomy, University of Innsbruck, Austria for the completion of the work reported in this Commentary: Professor Erich Brenner, Dr Ulrich Crepaz-Egar, Dr Clemens Hengg, Dr Dominik Knierzinger, R Hoermann.</div></section></section><footer><section role="doc-bibliography" epub:type="bibliography"><a id="cebib0010"/><h2 class="reftitle" id="s0010">References</h2><section role="doc-bibliography" epub:type="bibliography"><a id="cebibsec0010"/><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib1"><!--<a hreef="#bib_1">1</a>. --><a id="ref0010"/><a href="#bib_1">Cave</a> A.J. <cite>The nature and morphology of the costoclavicular ligament</cite>. <cite><i>J Anat</i></cite>. 1961;95:170–179.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib2"><!--<a hreef="#bib_2">2</a>. --><a id="ref0015"/><a href="#bib_2">Cave</a> A, Warwick Brown R. <cite>On the tendon of the subclavius muscle</cite>. <cite><i>J Bone Joint Surg Br</i></cite>. 1952;34:466–469.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib3"><!--<a hreef="#bib_3">3</a>. --><a id="ref0020"/><a href="#bib_3">Cogar</a> A.C, Johnsen P.H, Potter H.G, et al. <cite>Subclavius posticus: an anomalous muscle in association with suprascapular nerve compression in an athlete</cite>. <cite><i>Hand</i></cite>. 2015;10:76–79.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib4"><!--<a hreef="#bib_4">4</a>. --><a id="ref0025"/><a href="#bib_4">Georgiev</a> G.P, Jelev L. <cite>Bilateral fibrous replacement of subclavius muscle in relation to nerve and artery compression of the upper limb</cite>. <cite><i>Int J Anat Var</i></cite>. 2009;2:57–59.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib5"><!--<a hreef="#bib_5">5</a>. --><a id="ref0030"/><a href="#bib_5">Hasan</a> S.S, Romeo A.A. <cite>Thoracic outlet syndrome secondary to an anomalous subclavius muscle</cite>. <cite><i>Orthopedics [Case Report Journal]</i></cite>. 2001;24:793–794.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib6"><!--<a hreef="#bib_6">6</a>. --><a id="ref0035"/><a href="#bib_6">Jeon</a> A, Seo C.M, Choi Y.J, et al. <cite>Innervation of subclavius muscle: an anatomical study</cite>. <cite><i>Int J Morphol</i></cite>. 2018;36:817–820.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib7"><!--<a hreef="#bib_7">7</a>. --><a id="ref0040"/><a href="#bib_7">Kawagishi</a> K, Tokumine J, Lefor A.K. <cite>Clinical study. The relationship of the subclavius muscle with relevance to venous cannulation below the clavicle</cite>. <cite><i>Anesthesiol Res Pract</i></cite>. 2016;2016:6249483.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib8"><!--<a hreef="#bib_8">8</a>. --><a id="ref0045"/><a href="#bib_7">Konstant</a> W, Stern Jr. J.T, Fleagle J.G, et al. <cite>Function of the subclavius muscle in a nonhuman primate, the spider monkey (Ateles)</cite>. <cite><i>Folia Primatol</i></cite>. 1982;38:170–182.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib9"><!--<a hreef="#bib_9">9</a>. --><a id="ref0050"/><a href="#bib_9">Le</a> Double A.-F. <cite><i>Traité des variations du système musculaire de l’homme: et de leur signification au point de vue de l’anthropologie zoologique. Tome 1</i></cite>. Paris: Schleicher Frères; 1897 1897.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib10"><!--<a hreef="#bib_10">10</a>. --><a id="ref0055"/><a href="#bib_10">Lusskin</a> R, Weiss C.A, Winer J. <cite>The role of the subclavius muscle in the subclavian vein syndrome (costoclavicular syndrome) following fracture of the clavicle. A case report with a review of the pathophysiology of the costoclavicular space</cite>. <cite><i>Clin Orthop Relat Res</i></cite>. 1967;54:75–83.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib11"><!--<a hreef="#bib_11">11</a>. --><a id="ref0060"/><a href="#bib_11">McCleery</a> R.S, Kesterson J.E, Kirtley J.A, et al. <cite>Subclavius and anterior scalene muscle compression as a cause of intermittent obstruction of the subclavian vein</cite>. <cite><i>Ann Surg</i></cite>. 1951;133:588–602.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib12"><!--<a hreef="#bib_12">12</a>. --><a id="ref0065"/><a href="#bib_12">Mori</a> M. <cite>Statistics on the musculature of the Japanese</cite>. <cite><i>Okajimas Folia Anat Jpn</i></cite>. 1964;40:195–300.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib13"><!--<a hreef="#bib_13">13</a>. --><a id="ref0070"/><a href="#bib_13">Muellner</a> J, Kaelin-Lang A, Pfeiffer O, et al. <cite>Neurogenic thoracic outlet syndrome due to subclavius posticus muscle with dynamic brachial plexus compression: a case report</cite>. <cite><i>BMC Res Notes</i></cite>. 2015;8:351.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib14"><!--<a hreef="#bib_14">14</a>. --><a id="ref0075"/><a href="#bib_14">Ozcakar</a> L, Guney M.S, Ozdag F, et al. <cite>A sledgehammer on the brachial plexus: thoracic outlet syndrome, subclavius posticus muscle, and traction in aggregate</cite>. <cite><i>Arch Phys Med Rehabil [Case Reports]</i></cite>. 2010;91:656–658.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib15"><!--<a hreef="#bib_15">15</a>. --><a id="ref0080"/><a href="#bib_15">Piyawinijwong</a> S, Sirisathira N. <cite>Supernumerary subclavius muscle in Thais: predisposing cause of thoracic outlet syndrome</cite>. <cite><i>J Med Assoc Thai</i></cite>. 2010;93:1065–1069.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib16"><!--<a hreef="#bib_16">16</a>. --><a id="ref0085"/><a href="#bib_16">Reis</a> F.P, de Camargo A.M, Vitti M, et al. <cite>Electromyographic study of the subclavius muscle</cite>. <cite><i>Acta Anat (Basel)</i></cite>. 1979;105:284–290.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib17"><!--<a hreef="#bib_17">17</a>. --><a id="ref0090"/><a href="#bib_17">Testut</a> L. <cite><i>Traite d’anatomie humaine</i></cite>. 5th ed. Paris: O. Doin; 1904.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib18"><!--<a hreef="#bib_18">18</a>. --><a id="ref0095"/><a href="#bib_18">Yun</a> S, Park S, Kim C.S. <cite>Absence of the subclavius muscle with contralateral subclavius posticus muscle: first imaging report</cite>. <cite><i>Clin Imaging</i></cite>. 2018;49:54–57.</p></section></section></footer></section></body></html>