<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html lang="EN" xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head><meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/><title>Gray's Anatomy</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../Style/Elsevier_eBook.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" media="only screen" href="../../Style/media.css"/></head><body id="B9780702077050000495_bib"><footer><section role="doc-bibliography" epub:type="bibliography"><a id="cebib0010"/><h2 class="reftitle" id="s1730">References</h2><section role="doc-bibliography" epub:type="bibliography"><a id="cebibsec0010"/><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib1"><!--<a hreef="#bib_1">1</a>. --><a id="ref0070"/><a href="B9780702077050000495.xhtml#bib_1">Alizadehkhaiyat</a> O, Fisher A.C, Kemp G.J, et al. <cite>Shoulder muscle activation and fatigue during a controlled forceful hand-grip task</cite>. <cite><i>J Electromyogr Kinesiol</i></cite>. 2011;21:478–482.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib2"><!--<a hreef="#bib_2">2</a>. --><a id="ceotherref0010"/><a id="cetextref0010"/><span class="italic">A discussion of the principle that purposeful distal muscle activity causes up-regulation and facilitation of segments more proximal in the upper limb kinetic chain</span>.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib3"><!--<a hreef="#bib_3">3</a>. --><a id="ref0075"/><a href="B9780702077050000495.xhtml#bib_3">Atasoy</a> E. <cite>Thoracic outlet syndrome: anatomy</cite>. <cite><i>Hand Clin</i></cite>. 2004;20:7–14.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib4"><!--<a hreef="#bib_4">4</a>. --><a id="ref0080"/><a href="B9780702077050000495.xhtml#bib_4">Bankart</a> A.S. <cite>Recurrent or habitual dislocation of the shoulder-joint</cite>. <cite><i>Br Med J</i></cite>. 1923;2:1132–1133.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="fur44"><a id="ceotherref0015"/><a id="cetextref0015"/><span class="italic">The original description of the lesion that consumes so much clinical time</span>.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib5"><!--<a hreef="#bib_5">5</a>. --><a id="ref0085"/><a href="B9780702077050000495.xhtml#bib_5">Bavinck</a> J.N, Weaver D.D. <cite>Subclavian artery supply disruption sequence: hypothesis of a vascular etiology for Poland, Klippel-Feil, and Möbius anomalies</cite>. <cite><i>Am J Med Genet</i></cite>. 1986;23:903–918.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib6"><!--<a hreef="#bib_6">6</a>. --><a id="ref0090"/><a href="B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#bib_6">Birch</a> R. <cite><i>Surgical Disorders of the Peripheral Nerves</i></cite>. 2nd ed. London: Springer-Verlag; 2011.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="fur25"><a id="ceotherref0020"/><a id="cetextref0020"/><span class="italic">An account of the current state-of-the-art practice of diagnosis and management of surgical lesions of the peripheral nerves, including the brachial plexus</span>.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib7"><!--<a hreef="#bib_7">7</a>. --><a id="ref0095"/><a href="B9780702077050000495.xhtml#bib_7">Boileau</a> P, Walch G. <cite>The three-dimensional geometry of the proximal humerus. Implications for surgical technique and prosthetic design</cite>. <cite><i>J Bone Joint Surg Br</i></cite>. 1997;79:857–865.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib8"><!--<a hreef="#bib_8">8</a>. --><a id="ceotherref0025"/><a id="cetextref0025"/><span class="italic">The seminal European publication that introduced the science of measurement to the understanding of the morphology of the proximal humerus, and from which all subsequent work takes its lead</span>.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib9"><!--<a hreef="#bib_9">9</a>. --><a id="ref0100"/><a href="B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#bib_9">Brooks</a> C.H, Revell W.J, Heatley F.W. <cite>Vascularity of the humeral head after proximal humeral fractures. An anatomical cadaver study</cite>. <cite><i>J Bone Joint Surg Br</i></cite>. 1993;75B 132–6.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib10"><!--<a hreef="#bib_10">10</a>. --><a id="ref0105"/><a href="B9780702077050000495.xhtml#bib_10">Burkart</a> A.C, Debski R.E. <cite>Anatomy and function of the glenohumeral ligaments in anterior shoulder instability</cite>. <cite><i>Clin Orthop Relat Res</i></cite>. 2002;400:32–39.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib11"><!--<a hreef="#bib_11">11</a>. --><a id="ref0110"/><a href="B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#bib_11">Burkhart</a> S.S, Esch J.C, Jolson R.S. <cite>The rotator crescent and rotator cable: an anatomic description of the shoulder's ‘suspension bridge’</cite>. <cite><i>Arthroscopy</i></cite>. 1993;9:611–616.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib12"><!--<a hreef="#bib_12">12</a>. --><a id="ceotherref0030"/><a id="cetextref0030"/><span class="italic">A description and explanation of the clinical relevance of the anteroposterior capsular thickening linking subscapularis with the posterior rotator cuff, forming part of the fibrous ‘endoskeleton’ or fibrous frame (Gagey et al 1993) of the shoulder that confers stability on the moving humeral head</span>.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib13"><!--<a hreef="#bib_13">13</a>. --><a id="ref0115"/><a href="B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#bib_13">Camp</a> S.J, Birch R. <cite>Injuries to the spinal accessory nerve: a lesson to surgeons</cite>. <cite><i>J Bone Joint Surg Br</i></cite>. 2011;93:62–67.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib14"><!--<a hreef="#bib_14">14</a>. --><a id="ref0120"/><a href="B9780702077050000495.xhtml#bib_14">Colegate-Stone</a> T, Allom R, Singh R, et al. <cite>Classification of the morphology of the acromioclavicular joint using cadaveric and radiological analysis</cite>. <cite><i>J Bone Joint Surg Br</i></cite>. 2010;92:743–746.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib15"><!--<a hreef="#bib_15">15</a>. --><a id="ref0125"/><a href="B9780702077050000495.xhtml#bib_15">Copeland</a> S.A, Howard R.C. <cite>Thoracoscapular fusion for facioscapulohumeral dystrophy</cite>. <cite><i>J Bone Joint Surg Br</i></cite>. 1978;60:547–551.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib16"><!--<a hreef="#bib_16">16</a>. --><a id="ref0130"/><a href="B9780702077050000495.xhtml#bib_16">Cormack</a> G, Lamberty B. <cite><i>The arterial anatomy of skin flaps</i></cite>. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 1994.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib17"><!--<a hreef="#bib_17">17</a>. --><a id="ref0135"/><a href="B9780702077050000495.xhtml#bib_17">Dancker</a> M. <cite><i>The clinical-functional anatomy of the teres major muscle [diploma thesis]</i></cite>. Innsbruck Medical University; 2013.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib18"><!--<a hreef="#bib_18">18</a>. --><a id="ceotherref0035"/><a id="cetextref0035"/><span class="italic">Teres major was little studied until this cadaveric study. The muscle might provide a motor for an absent or insufficient subscapularis; the information given will assist the surgeon in planning transfer of the muscle</span>.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib19"><!--<a hreef="#bib_19">19</a>. --><a id="ref0140"/><a href="B9780702077050000495.xhtml#bib_19">Dhir</a> R, Lambert S. <cite>The undescended scapular syndrome: Sprengel and the cleithrum. A case series and hypothesis</cite>. <cite><i>BJJ</i></cite>. 2014;96B(Suppl 11):176.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib20"><!--<a hreef="#bib_20">20</a>. --><a id="ref0145"/><a href="B9780702077050000495.xhtml#bib_20">Dhir</a> R, Chin K, Lambert S. <cite>The congenital undescended scapula syndrome: Sprengel and the cleithrum: a case series and hypothesis</cite>. <cite><i>J Shoulder Elbow Surg</i></cite>. 2018;27:252–259.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib21"><!--<a hreef="#bib_21">21</a>. --><a id="ref0150"/><a href="B9780702077050000495.xhtml#bib_21">Di</a> Giacomo G, Pouliart N, Costantini A, et al. <cite><i>Atlas of Functional Shoulder Anatomy</i></cite>. New York: Springer; 2008.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib22"><!--<a hreef="#bib_22">22</a>. --><a id="ref0155"/><a href="B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#bib_22">Gagey</a> O, Arcache J, Welby F, et al. <cite>Fibrous frame of the rotator cuff. The concept of fibrous lock</cite>. <cite><i>Rev Chir Orthop Reparatrice Appar Mot</i></cite>. 1993;79:452–455 [In French].</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib23"><!--<a hreef="#bib_23">23</a>. --><a id="ceotherref0040"/><a id="cetextref0040"/><span class="italic">The seminal anatomical publication that describes the architecture of the collagenous frame of the shoulder, and which also provides a cohesive explanation for the clinical syndromes of rotator cuff failure</span></p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib24"><!--<a hreef="#bib_24">24</a>. --><a id="ref0160"/><a href="B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#bib_24">Gerber</a> C, Schneeberger A.G, Vinh T.S. <cite>The arterial vascularization of the humeral head. An anatomical study</cite>. <cite><i>J Bone Joint Surg Am</i></cite>. 1990;72:1486–1494.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib25"><!--<a hreef="#bib_25">25</a>. --><a id="ref0165"/><a href="B9780702077050000495.xhtml#bib_25">Halata</a> Z, Baumann K. <cite>Mechanoreceptors of the shoulder joint: structure and function</cite>. In: Di Giacomo G, Pouliart N, Costantini A, et al., eds. <cite><i>Atlas of Functional Shoulder Anatomy</i></cite>. New York: Springer; 2008 Ch. 5.1.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib26"><!--<a hreef="#bib_26">26</a>. --><a id="ref0170"/><a href="B9780702077050000495.xhtml#bib_26">Hertel</a> R, Lambert S.M, Ballmer F.T. <cite>The deltoid extension lag sign for diagnosis and grading of axillary nerve palsy</cite>. <cite><i>J Shoulder Elbow Surg</i></cite>. 1998;7:97–99.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib27"><!--<a hreef="#bib_27">27</a>. --><a id="ceotherref0045"/><a id="cetextref0045"/><span class="italic">A description of an example of the value of testing muscle capacity by eccentric activity, a more sensitive clinical method of determining weakness (that is, decrement from normal without testing against the power of the observer) than using resistance against a load (concentric activity)</span>.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib28"><!--<a hreef="#bib_28">28</a>. --><a id="ref0175"/><a href="B9780702077050000495.xhtml#bib_28">Huang</a> R, Zhi Q, Patel K, et al. <cite>Dual origin and segmental organisation of the avian scapula</cite>. <cite><i>Development</i></cite>. 2000;127:3789–3794.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib29"><!--<a hreef="#bib_29">29</a>. --><a id="ref0180"/><a href="B9780702077050000495.xhtml#bib_29">Kambhampati</a> S, Birch R, Cobiella C, et al. <cite>Posterior subluxation and dislocation of the shoulder in obstetric brachial plexus palsy</cite>. <cite><i>J Bone Joint Surg Br</i></cite>. 2006;88:213–219.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib30"><!--<a hreef="#bib_30">30</a>. --><a id="ref0185"/><a href="B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#bib_30">Keener</a> J.D, Chafik D, Kim H.M, et al. <cite>Insertional anatomy of the triceps brachii tendon</cite>. <cite><i>J Shoulder Elbow Surg</i></cite>. 2010;19:399–405.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib31"><!--<a hreef="#bib_31">31</a>. --><a id="ref0190"/><a href="B9780702077050000495.xhtml#bib_31">Lambert</a> S. <cite>Radial nerve palsy associated with fractures of the shaft of the humerus: a systematic review</cite> Further opinion. <cite><i>J Bone Joint Surg Br</i></cite>. 2005;87:1647–1652.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib32"><!--<a hreef="#bib_32">32</a>. --><a id="ref0195"/><a href="B9780702077050000495.xhtml#bib_32">Leijnse</a> J.N.A.L, Han S.-H, Kwon Y.H. <cite>Morphology of deltoid origin and end tendons – a generic model</cite>. <cite><i>J Anat</i></cite>. 2008;213:733–742.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib33"><!--<a hreef="#bib_33">33</a>. --><a id="ceotherref0050"/><a id="cetextref0050"/><span class="italic">A description of the internal architecture of deltoid in relation to the discrete functions of the parts of that muscle</span>.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib34"><!--<a hreef="#bib_34">34</a>. --><a id="ref0200"/><a href="B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#bib_34">Mochizuki</a> T, Sugaya H, Uomizu M, et al. <cite>Humeral insertion of the supraspinatus and infraspinatus. New anatomical findings regarding the footprint of the rotator cuff</cite>. <cite><i>J Bone Joint Surg Am</i></cite>. 2008;90:962–969.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib35"><!--<a hreef="#bib_35">35</a>. --><a id="ref0205"/><a href="B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#bib_35">Oberlin</a> C, Béal D, Leechavengvongs S, et al. <cite>Nerve transfer to biceps muscle using a part of ulnar nerve for C5–C6 avulsion of the brachial plexus: anatomical study and report of four cases</cite>. <cite><i>J Hand Surg [Am]</i></cite>. 1994;19:232–237.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib36"><!--<a hreef="#bib_36">36</a>. --><a id="ref0210"/><a href="B9780702077050000495.xhtml#bib_36">Sewell</a> M.D, Al-Hadithy N, LeLeu A, et al. <cite>Instability of the sternoclavicular joint: current concepts in classification in treatment and outcomes</cite>. <cite><i>Bone Joint J</i></cite>. 2013;95:721–731.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib37"><!--<a hreef="#bib_37">37</a>. --><a id="ref0215"/><a href="B9780702077050000495.xhtml#bib_37">Spinner</a> R.J, Amrani K.K, Kliot M, et al. <cite>Suprascapular intraneural ganglia and glenohumeral joint connections</cite>. <cite><i>J Neurosurg</i></cite>. 2006;104:551–557.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib38"><!--<a hreef="#bib_38">38</a>. --><a id="ref0220"/><a href="B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#bib_38">Staniek</a> M, Brenner E. <cite>Variations in the anatomy of the anterior-inferior rotator cuff: the ‘infraglenoid muscle’</cite>. <cite><i>Ann Anat</i></cite>. 2012;194:373–380.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib39"><!--<a hreef="#bib_39">39</a>. --><a id="ref0225"/><a href="B9780702077050000495.xhtml#bib_39">Streit</a> J.J, Lenarz C.J, Shishani Y, et al. <cite>Pectoralis major tendon transfer for the treatment of scapular winging due to long thoracic nerve palsy</cite>. <cite><i>J Shoulder Elbow Surg</i></cite>. 2012;21:685–690.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib40"><!--<a hreef="#bib_40">40</a>. --><a id="ceotherref0055"/><a id="cetextref0055"/><span class="italic">The largest series of the direct or indirect transfer of the sternal head of pectoralis major for insufficiency of serratus anterior in symptomatic scapular dyskinesia</span>.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib41"><!--<a hreef="#bib_41">41</a>. --><a id="ref0230"/><a href="B9780702077050000495.xhtml#bib_41">Taylor</a> G.I, Razaboni R.M, eds. <cite><i>Michel Salmon: Anatomic Studies. Book 1, Arteries of the Muscles of the Extremities and the Trunk. Book 2, Arterial Anastomotic Pathways of the Extremities</i></cite>. St Louis: Quality Medical Publishing; 1994.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib42"><!--<a hreef="#bib_42">42</a>. --><a id="ceotherref0060"/><a id="cetextref0060"/><span class="italic">A book that contains the translated work of Dr Michel Salmon: it describes the blood supply to muscle, as well as the anastomotic pathways in the limbs</span>.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib43"><!--<a hreef="#bib_43">43</a>. --><a id="ref0235"/><a href="B9780702077050000495.xhtml#bib_43">Testut</a> L. Cinquieme edition. <cite><i>Traite d'Anatomie Humaine</i></cite>. 1. Paris: O.Doin; 1904:804.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib44"><!--<a hreef="#bib_44">44</a>. --><a id="ref0240"/><a href="B9780702077050000495.xhtml#bib_44">Vangsness</a> Jr. C.T, Jorgenson S.S, Watson T, et al. <cite>The origin of the long head of the biceps from the scapula and glenoid labrum. An anatomical study of 100 shoulders</cite>. <cite><i>J Bone Joint Surg Br</i></cite>. 1994;76:951–954.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib45"><!--<a hreef="#bib_45">45</a>. --><a id="ceotherref0065"/><a id="cetextref0065"/><span class="italic">A detailed description of the variation in the cadaveric anatomy of the origin of biceps brachii, permitting more accurate interpretation of the clinical variance of this structure</span>.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry" id="bib46"><!--<a hreef="#bib_46">46</a>. --><a id="ref0245"/><a href="B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#bib_46">Wynn</a> Parry C.B. <cite><i>Rehabilitation of the Hand</i></cite>. 4th ed. London: Butterworth; 1981.</p></section></section></footer></body></html>