<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html lang="EN" xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head><meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/><title>Gray's Anatomy</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../Style/Elsevier_eBook.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" media="only screen" href="../../Style/media.css"/></head><body><section role="doc-chapter" epub:type="chapter"><div id="CN"><a id="c0080"/></div><h1 class="chaptitle" epub:type="title" id="B978070207705000080X">Chapter 80: The anatomy of the peripheral nervous system</h1><section><div class="textfl" id="p0010">The peripheral nervous system (PNS) is composed of spinal and cranial nerves, their associated ganglia (autonomic and sensory) and their ramifications that transmit afferent and efferent information between the central nervous system (CNS) and the rest of the body. It also includes the peripheral part of the autonomic nervous system (ANS), notably the sympathetic trunks and the sympathetic and parasympathetic ganglia and their ramifications, and the enteric nervous system (ENS), composed of plexuses of nerve fibres and cell bodies in the wall of the gastrointestinal tract, and the visceral afferent system.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0010"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle0010">Cranial Nerves</h2><div class="textfl" id="p0015">Cranial nerves are the means by which the brain receives information from, and controls the activities of, the head and neck and the thoracic and greater part of the abdominal viscera. There are 12 pairs of cranial nerves, individually named and numbered (Roman numerals) in a rostrocaudal sequence (see <a href="../B9780702077050000240/B9780702077050000240.xhtml#t0010">Table 24.1</a>). Unlike spinal nerves, only some cranial nerves are mixed in function, i.e. they carry both sensory and motor fibres; others are purely sensory or motor. The first cranial nerve (I; olfactory) has an ancient lineage and is derived from the forerunner of the cerebral hemisphere. It retains this unique position through the connections of the olfactory bulb, and is the only sensory cranial nerve that projects directly to the cerebral cortex rather than indirectly via the thalamus. The areas of cerebral cortex receiving olfactory input have a primitive cellular organization and are an integral part of the limbic system, which is concerned with the emotional aspects of behaviour. The second cranial nerve (II; optic) consists of the axons of second-order visual neurones and these terminate in the thalamus. Most of the component fibres of the other 10 pairs of cranial nerves originate from, or terminate in, named cranial nerve nuclei in the brainstem.</div></section><section><a id="s0015"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle0015">Olfactory nerve</h2><div class="textfl" id="p0020">The olfactory nerve is the first cranial nerve and, as its name suggests, is concerned with olfaction (the sense of smell). It is composed of bundles of very small unmyelinated axons derived from olfactory receptor neurones in the olfactory mucosa. The axons are in varying stages of maturity, reflecting the constant turnover of olfactory neurones that takes place in the olfactory epithelium. Bundles of axons are surrounded by olfactory ensheathing cells and form a plexiform network in the subepithelial lamina propria of the mucosa. The bundles unite into as many as 20 branches that cross the cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone in lateral and medial groups, and enter the overlying olfactory bulb, where they end in glomeruli. Each branch is ensheathed by dura mater and pia/arachnoid as it passes through the cribriform plate (see <a href="../B9780702077050000392/B9780702077050000392.xhtml#f0055">Fig. 39.13A</a>). The dura subsequently becomes continuous with the nasal periosteum, and the pia/arachnoid merges with the connective tissue sheaths that surround the nerve bundles, an arrangement that may facilitate the spread of infection into the cranial cavity from the nasal cavity.</div><div class="text" id="p0025">The olfactory bulb is continuous posteriorly with the olfactory tract, through which the output of the bulb projects directly to the ipsilateral retrobulbar area (anterior olfactory nucleus), olfactory tubercle, prepiriform area, amygdala and rostral entorhinal cortex. There is a clear laminar structure in the olfactory bulb (<a href="../B978070207705000032X/B978070207705000032X.xhtml#f0050">Fig. 32.32A</a>). Different odour molecules are represented by different patterns of spatial activity in the olfactory bulb (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib11a" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_11a">Shepherd 2006</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p2001">In severe injuries involving the anterior cranial fossa, the olfactory bulb may be separated from the olfactory nerves or the nerves may be torn, producing anosmia, i.e. loss of olfaction. Fractures may involve the meninges, so that cerebrospinal fluid may leak into the nose, resulting in cerebrospinal rhinorrhoea. These injuries open up avenues for intracranial infection from the nasal cavity.</div></section><section><a id="s0020"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle0020">Optic Nerve</h2><div class="textfl" id="p0030">The optic nerve is the second cranial nerve and contains the axons of retinal ganglion cells. The two optic nerves join to form the optic chiasma which is usually positioned over the diaphragma sellae and pituitary gland (normofixed), although it may be prefixed (above the tuberculum sellae) or postfixed (above the dorsum sellae). On entering the optic nerve, retinal ganglion cell axons initially maintain their relative retinal positions, with axons from the fovea forming a lateral wedge. This retinotopic mapping is largely maintained within the optic nerve, although nearer the chiasma the foveal axons take a position in the centre of the optic nerve while temporal fibres occupy their previous lateral location. A substantial rearrangement of axons takes place at the chiasma. Most axons arising from the nasal half of a line bisecting the fovea within each retina cross in the chiasma to enter the contralateral optic tract. Fibres from the temporal hemi-retinas do not generally cross in the chiasma.</div><div class="text" id="p9030">Th axons within the optic tract were thought to maintain their topographic order and each tract was assumed to be a single representation of the contralateral hemifield. However, it is now clear that axons are mainly organized in functional groupings, larger superficial axons representing the magnocellular pathway and deeper axons originating from midget ganglion cells and forming the parvocellular pathway. This arrangement is chronotopic, the deeper axons developing earlier during axogenesis than the more superficial ones (Reese 1993).</div><div class="text" id="p9035">Almost all (90%) of the retinal ganglion cell axons terminate on neurones in the lateral geniculate nucleus. Extrageniculate axons (10%) leave the optic tract before the lateral geniculate nucleus: they may leave the optic chiasma dorsally and project to the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the hypothalamus, or may branch off the optic tract at the superior brachium and project to the superior colliculus, pretectal areas and inferior pulvinar.</div><div class="text" id="p0987">The optic nerve is usually described in four parts, intracranial (approximately 10<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm), intracanalicular (approximately 10<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm), intraorbital (25–30<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm), and intraocular (1<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm). The intracranial part arises from the optic chiasma in the suprasellar cistern. It is surrounded by the optic sheath and its dorsal surface is covered by the falciform ligament. The intracanalicular part passes through the optic canal together with the ophthalmic artery: this is the weakest point of the anterior visual pathway because the nerve is fixed to its bony surroundings by fibrous adhesions. The intraorbital part passes forwards, laterally and downwards, and pierces the sclera at the lamina cribrosa, slightly medial to the posterior pole: it has a somewhat tortuous course within the orbit that allows for movements of the eyeball (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib28" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_28">Demer 2016</a>). The subarachnoid space surrounding the intracranial part is continuous with the subarachnoid space around the intracanalicular and intraorbital parts. The dural sheath surrounding the optic nerve originates at the level of the optic canal and accompanies the optic nerve to the sclera. The intraorbital part of optic nerve has important relationships with other orbital structures (see <a href="../B9780702077050000446/B9780702077050000446.xhtml#f0025">Fig. 44.4</a>). As it leaves the optic canal, it lies superomedial to the ophthalmic artery, and is separated from lateral rectus by the oculomotor, nasociliary and abducens nerves, and sometimes by the ophthalmic veins. It is closely related to the origins of the four recti, whereas more anteriorly, where the muscles diverge, it is separated from them by a substantial amount of orbital fat. Just beyond the optic canal, the ophthalmic artery and the nasociliary nerve cross the optic nerve to reach the medial wall of the orbit. The central artery of the retina enters the substance of the optic nerve about halfway along its length. Near the back of the eyeball, the optic nerve is surrounded by the long and short ciliary nerves and vessels.</div></section><section><a id="s0025"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle0025">Oculomotor Nerve</h2><div class="textfl" id="p0035">The oculomotor nerve is the third cranial nerve and innervates levator palpebrae superioris and four of the extraocular muscles (superior, inferior and medial rectus and inferior oblique) (see <a href="../B9780702077050000446/B9780702077050000446.xhtml#f0095">Fig. 44.15</a>). It also conveys preganglionic parasympathetic fibres from cell bodies in the Edinger–Westphal nucleus that relay in the ciliary ganglion.<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.46400000000001E14" id="pagebreak_1.46400000000001E14"/><a id="pg1464.e12"/></div><section><a id="s8720"/><section><a id="s9020"/><h3 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle2006">Oculomotor nuclear complex</h3><div class="textfl" id="p2004">The nuclear complex from which the oculomotor nerve arises consists of several groups of large motor neurones that are collectively designated the oculomotor nucleus, and the smaller preganglionic parasympathetic Edinger–Westphal nucleus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000288/B9780702077050000288.xhtml#f0020">Figs 28.3</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000288/B9780702077050000288.xhtml#f0085">28.16</a>). The nuclear complex lies at the ventromedial aspect of the periaqueductal grey matter, superior to the trochlear nuclei and is partially enclosed by the fibres of the median longitudinal fasciculi. It is approximately 5 mm long and is divisible into neuronal groups that correlate with the distribution of motor fibres within the oculomotor nerve. Afferent inputs to the oculomotor nuclear complex include fibres from the rostral interstitial nucleus of the medial longitudinal fasciculus and the interstitial nucleus of Cajal, both of which are involved in the control of vertical and torsional gaze. Other inputs come, directly or indirectly, from the nuclei of the posterior commissure and, via these nuclei, from the frontal eye fields, the superior colliculus, the dentate nucleus and cortical areas. The medial longitudinal fasciculus carries afferent connections from the trochlear, abducens and vestibular nuclei.</div><div class="text" id="p9015">The fibres from the medial vestibular nucleus project to the medial rectus subnucleus. In order from dorsal to ventral, the oculomotor neurone groups innervate the ipsilateral inferior rectus, inferior oblique and medial rectus. A medially placed column of cells innervates the contralateral superior rectus through axons that decussate in the caudal part of this subnucleus. A median subnucleus of large neurones, designated the caudal central nucleus, lies at the caudal pole of the oculomotor nucleus adjacent to the superior rectus and medial rectus subnuclei. Fascicles of axons from these subnuclei course forwards in the midbrain, through the tegmentum, red nucleus and medial substantia nigra, to emerge as the oculomotor nerve in the interpeduncular fossa. The fascicles are most probably arranged from medial to lateral subserving the pupil, inferior rectus, medial rectus, levator palpebrae superioris and superior rectus, and inferior oblique.</div></section><section><a id="s9025"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle2005">Intra- and extracranial course</h4><div class="textfl" id="p9040">For descriptive purposes, the oculomotor nerve is usually divided into cisternal, cavernous and orbital portions: surgically oriented classifications derived from combined microsurgical and endoscopic cadaveric dissection studies have proposed five or seven parts (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib47" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_47">Iaconetta et al 2010</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib90" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_90">Park et al 2017</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0040">The cisternal portion of the oculomotor nerve emerges from the midbrain, either through the medial sulcus of the crus cerebri in the caudal part of the interpeduncular fossa or through the medial or the middle part of the crus cerebri. It usually passes forwards and laterally through the interpeduncular cistern between the posterior communicating artery and the superior cerebellar artery: this portion of the nerve is supplied by the P1 and P2 segments of the posterior cerebral artery. The pupilloconstrictor fibres lie superficially on the dorsomedial surface of the cisternal portion of oculomotor nerve, a location that renders them vulnerable to aneurysmal compression (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib49" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_49">Kerr and Hollowell 1964</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib109" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_109">Shechtman et al 2007</a>), whereas a pupil-sparing palsy of the oculomotor nerve is pathognomonic of an ischaemic lesion, which tends to involve the central region of the nerve. The oculomotor nerve next passes inferolateral to the posterior communicating artery and inferomedial to the uncus and enters the roof of the cavernous sinus through the oculomotor trigone. This cavernous portion of the nerve passes along the lateral dural wall of the cavernous sinus, dividing into superior and inferior divisions that run beneath the trochlear and ophthalmic nerves. The two divisions enter the orbit through the superior orbital fissure, within the common tendinous ring of the recti, and separated by the nasociliary branch of the ophthalmic nerve.</div><div class="text" id="p0045">The superior division of the oculomotor nerve passes above the optic nerve to enter the inferior (ocular) surface of superior rectus. It supplies this muscle and gives off a branch that runs to innervate levator palpebrae superioris. The inferior division of the oculomotor nerve divides into medial, central and lateral branches. The medial branch passes beneath the optic nerve to enter the lateral (ocular) surface of medial rectus; the central branch runs downwards and forwards to enter the superior (ocular) surface of inferior rectus; the lateral branch travels forwards on the lateral side of inferior rectus to enter the orbital surface of inferior oblique and also communicates with the ciliary ganglion to distribute parasympathetic fibres to sphincter pupillae and the ciliary muscle.</div><section><a id="s9030"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle2007">Edinger–Westphal nucleus</h5><div class="textfl" id="p9020">The Edinger–Westphal nucleus lies dorsal to the main oculomotor nucleus. It is composed of small, multipolar, preganglionic parasympathetic (general visceral efferent, GVE) neurones. Afferent inputs to the nucleus come primarily from the pretectal nuclei bilaterally, mediating the pupillary light reflex, and from the visual cortex, mediating accommodation. Efferent fibres from the nucleus travel in the oculomotor nerve to synapse with postganglionic neurones in the ciliary ganglion (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib55a" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_55a">Kozicz et al 2011</a>), and also descend through the medial longitudinal fasciculus to innervate the medial and descending vestibular nuclei (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib83a" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_83a">Nieuwenhuys et al 2008</a>).</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s0030"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle9125">Trochlear Nerve</h2><div class="textfl" id="p9025">The trochlear nerve is the fourth cranial nerve and innervates superior oblique. It has the longest intracranial course and the smallest diameter of all of the cranial nerves, and is also the only cranial nerve to emerge from the dorsal surface of the brainstem, lateral to the lower edge of the inferior colliculus.</div><section><a id="s7609"/><section><a id="s2009"/><h3 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0030">Trochlear nucleus</h3><div class="textfl" id="p2010">The trochlear nucleus is a small ovoid mass of grey matter just to the side of the midline (see <a href="../B9780702077050000288/B9780702077050000288.xhtml#f0080">Fig. 28.15</a>). It is bounded by the periaqueductal grey matter dorsally and is enveloped by the fibres of the longitudinal fasciculi ventrally and laterally (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib80a" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_80a">Naidich et al 2009</a>). The nucleus is part of the somatic efferent column in line with the oculomotor, abducens and hypoglossal nuclei. Afferent inputs to the trochlear nucleus include fibres from the rostral intermediate nucleus of the medial longitudinal fasciculus and from the interstitial nucleus of Cajal, both of which are involved in the control of vertical and torsional gaze. Other inputs come from the vestibular, abducens and oculomotor nuclei and, directly or indirectly, from the nuclei of the posterior commissure (nuclei of Darkschewitsch and of Cajal) and, via these nuclei, from the superior colliculus, frontal eye fields and other cortical areas. Other afferents arrive from the nucleus prepositus hypoglossi. Efferent trochlear fibres first course dorsally and caudally, just deep to the outer perimeter of the periaqueductal grey matter and medial to the mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus. The trochlear nerves then decussate within the superior medullary velum of the fourth ventricle. A few fibres may remain ipsilateral.</div></section><section><a id="s9040"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle2011">Intra- and extracranial course</h4><div class="textfl" id="p2012">The nerves emerge from the dorsal surface of the brainstem just caudal to the inferior colliculus and to each side of the frenulum veli. At the point of emergence, a variable number of rootlets, usually two, unite to form the nerve trunks that curve ventrally through the perimesencephalic cisterns, between the superior cerebellar arteries below and the posterior cerebral arteries above. The cisternal portion of each nerve courses anterolaterally, winding round the cerebral peduncle toward the tentorium cerebelli through the quadrigeminal and ambient cisterns. The nerve passes anteriorly along the infratentorial groove of the tentorium cerebelli and penetrates the roof of the cavernous sinus at the junction of the anterior and posterior petroclinoid dural folds. The cavernous portion continues along the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus below the oculomotor nerve, crossing this nerve at the level of the optic strut to become the most superior structure in the cavernous sinus. The trochlear nerve enters the orbit through the superior orbital fissure outside the common tendinous ring, superior to levator palpebrae superioris and medial to the frontal and lacrimal nerves (see <a href="../B9780702077050000446/B9780702077050000446.xhtml#f0100">Fig. 44.16</a>). The orbital portion runs medially across levator palpebrae superior and superior rectus to reach superior oblique: its branches typically end on the posterior one-third of the muscle, most often on the medial aspect (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib48" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_48">Joo and Rhoton 2015</a>).</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s0035"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle0035">Trigeminal Nerve</h2><div class="textfl" id="p0055">The trigeminal nerve is the fifth cranial nerve and has extensive sensory, motor and autonomic components.</div><section><a id="s0045"/><section><a id="s0050"/><h3 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0040">Sensory nuclei and central connections</h3><div class="textfl" id="p0060">The trigeminal nerve has three sensory nuclei (spinal tract, principal and mesencephalic) and one motor nucleus. On entering the pons, the fibres of the sensory root of the trigeminal nerve run dorsomedially towards the principal sensory nucleus. About 50% of the fibres divide into ascending and descending branches and the others ascend or descend without division. The descending fibres form the spinal tract of the trigeminal nerve, which terminates in the medially adjacent spinal nucleus of the trigeminal nerve. Some ascending trigeminal fibres, many of them heavily myelinated, synapse around the small neurones in the principal sensory nucleus, which lies lateral to the motor nucleus and medial to the middle cerebellar peduncle, and is continuous inferiorly with the spinal nucleus of the trigeminal nerve. The principal nucleus <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464000000000001E15" id="pagebreak_1.464000000000001E15"/><a id="pg1464.e13"/>is considered to be mainly concerned with tactile stimuli. Other ascending fibres enter the mesencephalic nucleus, a column of unipolar cells with peripheral branches that may convey proprioceptive impulses from the masticatory muscles, and possibly also from the teeth, the facial and oculogyric muscles. Its neurones are unique in being the only primary sensory unipolar neurones that have cell bodies in the CNS. It is the relay for the ‘jaw jerk’, the only significant supraspinal monosynaptic reflex. Nerve fibres that ascend to the mesencephalic nucleus may give collaterals to the motor nucleus of the trigeminal nerve and to the cerebellum. Most fibres that arise in the trigeminal sensory nuclei cross the midline, ascend in the trigeminal lemniscus and end in the contralateral ventral posteromedial thalamic nucleus, from which third-order neurones project to the postcentral gyrus (areas 3, 1, 2).</div></section><section><a id="s0055"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0045">Motor nucleus</h4><div class="textfl" id="p0065">The motor nucleus of the trigeminal nerve is ovoid in outline and lies in the upper pontine tegmentum, under the lateral part of the floor of the fourth ventricle. It lies medial to the principal sensory nucleus from which it is separated by fibres of the trigeminal nerve. It forms the rostral part of the pharyngeal (special visceral) efferent column. The motor nucleus contains characteristic large multipolar neurones interspersed with smaller multipolar cells, organized into a number of relatively discrete subnuclei that drive individual muscles. It receives fibres from both corticonuclear tracts. These fibres leave the tracts at the nuclear level or higher in the pons (aberrant corticospinal fibres), descend in the medial lemniscus and may end on motor neurones or interneurones. The motor nucleus receives afferents from the sensory nuclei of the trigeminal nerve, possibly including some from the mesencephalic nucleus, that form monosynaptic reflex arcs for proprioceptive control of the masticatory muscles. It also receives afferents from the reticular formation, red nucleus and tectum, the medial longitudinal fasciculus and possibly from the locus coeruleus. Collectively these represent pathways by which salivary secretion and mastication may be coordinated.</div><section><a id="s8060"/><section><a id="s0060"/><section><a id="s0065"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0050">Tensor tympani and stapedius reflex</p><div class="textfl" id="p0070">Loud sound elicits reflex contraction of tensor tympani and stapedius, attenuating movement of the tympanic membrane and the ossicular chain. Afferent impulses travel in the cochlear nerve to the cochlear nuclei in the brainstem. Efferent fibres to tensor tympani arise in the motor nucleus of the trigeminal nerve and travel in the mandibular division of the nerve. Efferent fibres to stapedius originate in the facial nucleus and travel in the facial nerve.</div></section><section><a id="s0070"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0055">Jaw jerk reflex</p><div class="textfl" id="p0075">The jaw jerk reflex is a deep tendon reflex, elicited by tapping on the midline of the mandible. Rapid stretching of the muscles that close the jaw (masseter, temporalis, medial pterygoid) activates muscle spindle afferents that travel via the mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve to the mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus. Collaterals project monosynaptically to the motor nucleus of the trigeminal nerve in the pons, establishing a two-neurone reflex arc.</div></section></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s0075"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle0060">Intra- and extracranial course</h3><div class="textfl" id="p0080">Embryologically, each division of the trigeminal nerve is associated with a developing facial process that gives rise to a specific area of the adult face: the ophthalmic nerve is associated with the frontonasal process, the maxillary nerve with the maxillary process, and the mandibular nerve with the mandibular process.</div><section><a id="s0080"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0065">Ophthalmic nerve</h4><div class="textfl" id="p0085">The ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve is a sensory nerve. It arises from the trigeminal ganglion in the middle cranial fossa and passes forwards along the lateral dural wall of the cavernous sinus, giving off three main branches, the lacrimal, frontal and nasociliary nerves, just before it reaches the superior orbital fissure. These branches subsequently travel through the orbit to supply targets that are primarily in the upper part of the face (conjunctiva, skin over the forehead, upper eyelid and much of the external surface of the nose via the supraorbital, lacrimal, infratrochlear and external nasal nerves).</div><section><a id="s0085"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0070">Lacrimal nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0090">The lacrimal nerve is the smallest of the main ophthalmic branches. It enters the orbit through the superior orbital fissure, outside the common tendinous ring and lateral to the frontal and trochlear nerves. It passes forwards along the lateral wall of the orbit on the superior border of lateral rectus, and travels through the lacrimal gland and the orbital septum to supply the conjunctiva and skin covering the lateral part of the upper eyelid. The nerve also communicates with the zygomatic branch of the maxillary nerve, which may carry some postganglionic parasympathetic fibres from the pterygopalatine ganglion to the lacrimal gland. Occasionally, the lacrimal nerve is absent, in which case it is replaced by the zygomaticotemporal nerve; the relationship is reciprocal, and when the zygomaticotemporal nerve is absent it is replaced by a branch of the lacrimal nerve. The lacrimal nerve anastomoses with filaments of the facial nerve.</div></section><section><a id="s0090"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0075">Frontal nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0095">The frontal nerve is the largest branch of the ophthalmic nerve. It enters the orbit through the superior orbital fissure outside the common tendinous ring, and lies between the lacrimal nerve laterally and the trochlear nerve medially. It passes forwards towards the rim of the orbit on levator palpebrae superioris, and about halfway along this course it divides into the supraorbital and supratrochlear nerves.</div><section><a id="s0095"/><section><a id="s0100"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0080">Supraorbital nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p0100">The supraorbital nerve is the larger of the two terminal branches of the frontal nerve. It continues forwards along levator palpebrae superioris until it leaves the orbit through the supraorbital notch or foramen to emerge onto the forehead. It supplies the mucous membrane that lines the frontal sinus, the conjunctiva and the skin covering the upper eyelid via palpebral branches. It ascends on the forehead with the supraorbital artery, and divides into medial and lateral branches that supply the skin of the scalp nearly as far back as the lambdoid suture. These branches are at first deep to the frontal belly of occipitofrontalis. The medial branch perforates the muscle to reach the skin, while the lateral branch pierces the epicranial aponeurosis. The postganglionic sympathetic fibres that innervate the sweat glands of the supraorbital area probably travel in the supraorbital nerve, having entered the ophthalmic nerve via its communication with the abducens nerve within the cavernous sinus.</div></section><section><a id="s0105"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0085">Supratrochlear nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p0105">The supratrochlear nerve is the smaller terminal branch of the frontal nerve. It runs anteromedially in the roof of the orbit, passes above the trochlea for the tendon of superior oblique, and supplies a descending filament to the infratrochlear branch of the nasociliary nerve. The nerve emerges between the trochlea and the supraorbital foramen at the frontal notch, curves up on the forehead close to the bone with the supratrochlear artery, and supplies the conjunctiva and the skin of the upper eyelid. It then ascends beneath corrugator and the frontal belly of occipitofrontalis before dividing into branches that pierce these muscles to supply the skin of the lower forehead near the midline.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s0110"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0090">Nasociliary nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0110">The nasociliary nerve is intermediate in size between the frontal and lacrimal nerves. It is more deeply placed in the orbit, which it enters through the common tendinous ring, lying between the two rami of the oculomotor nerve. It crosses the optic nerve with the ophthalmic artery and runs obliquely below superior rectus and superior oblique to reach the medial orbital wall, where it gives off the anterior and posterior ethmoidal nerves. The nasociliary nerve has long ciliary and infratrochlear branches and a connection with the ciliary ganglion.</div><section><a id="s0115"/><section><a id="s0120"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0095">Anterior ethmoidal nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p0115">The anterior ethmoidal nerve passes through the anterior ethmoidal foramen and canal and enters the cranial cavity. It runs forwards in a groove on the upper surface of the cribriform plate beneath the dura mater, descends through a slit lateral to the crista galli into the nasal cavity, where it occupies a groove on the internal surface of the nasal bone, and supplies the roof of the nasal cavity. It gives off medial and lateral internal nasal branches that supply the anterior and upper parts of the septum and the anterior part of the lateral wall, respectively, before emerging at the inferior margin of the nasal bone as the external nasal nerve, which descends through the lateral wall of the nose and supplies the skin of the nose below the nasal bones to the nasal tip but excluding the alar portion around the external nares: damage following nasal trauma may result in paraesthesia of the nasal tip.</div></section><section><a id="s0125"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0100">Posterior ethmoidal nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p0120">The posterior ethmoidal nerve leaves the orbit by the posterior ethmoidal foramen and supplies the ethmoidal and sphenoidal sinuses.</div></section><section><a id="s0130"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0105">Infratrochlear nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p0125">The infratrochlear nerve leaves the orbit below the trochlea and supplies the skin of the eyelids, the conjunctiva, lacrimal sac, lacrimal caruncle and the side of the nose above the medial canthus.<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E16" id="pagebreak_1.464E16"/><a id="pg1464.e14"/></div></section><section><a id="s0135"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0110">Long ciliary nerves</p><div class="textfl" id="p0130">Two or three long ciliary nerves branch from the nasociliary nerve as it crosses the optic nerve. They accompany the short ciliary nerves, pierce the sclera near the attachment of the optic nerve, and run forwards between the sclera and choroid. They supply the ciliary body, iris and cornea, and contain postganglionic sympathetic fibres for dilator pupillae from neurones in the superior cervical ganglion. An alternative pathway for the supply of the dilator pupillae is via the sympathetic root associated with the ciliary ganglion.</div></section><section><a id="s0140"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0115">Ramus communicans to the ciliary ganglion</p><div class="textfl" id="p0135">The ramus communicans to the ciliary ganglion usually branches from the nasociliary nerve as the latter enters the orbit lateral to the optic nerve. It is sometimes joined by a filament from the internal carotid sympathetic plexus or from the superior ramus of the oculomotor nerve as it enters the posterosuperior angle of the ganglion.</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s0145"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0120">Maxillary nerve</h4><div class="textfl" id="p0140">The maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve is a sensory nerve. It leaves the skull via the foramen rotundum and enters the upper part of the pterygopalatine fossa where many of its extracranial branches are given off. It crosses the pterygopalatine fossa, giving off two large ganglionic branches that contain fibres destined for the nose, palate and pharynx and that all pass through the pterygopalatine ganglion without synapsing. The maxillary nerve then inclines sharply laterally on the posterior surface of the orbital process of the palatine bone and on the upper part of the posterior surface of the maxilla in the inferior orbital fissure (which is continuous posteriorly with the pterygopalatine fossa): it lies outside the orbital periosteum, and gives off zygomatic, and then posterior superior alveolar branches. About halfway between the orbital apex and the orbital rim, the maxillary nerve turns medially to enter the infraorbital canal as the infraorbital nerve. Named branches from the main trunk are meningeal, ganglionic, zygomatic, posterior, middle and anterior superior alveolar and infraorbital nerves. Named branches from the pterygopalatine ganglion are orbital, nasopalatine, posterior superior nasal, greater (anterior) palatine, lesser (posterior) palatine and pharyngeal nerves.</div><section><a id="s0150"/><section><a id="s0155"/><section><a id="s0160"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0125">Meningeal nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p0145">The meningeal branch of the maxillary nerve arises within the middle cranial fossa and runs with the middle meningeal vessels. It contributes to the innervation of the dura mater (see <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0015">Fig. 25.3B</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0165"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0130">Ganglionic branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p0150">Two ganglionic branches usually connect the maxillary nerve to the pterygopalatine ganglion.</div></section><section><a id="s0170"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0135">Zygomatic nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p0155">The zygomatic branch of the maxillary nerve leaves the pterygopalatine fossa through the inferior orbital fissure with the maxillary nerve and lies close to the base of the lateral wall of the orbit. Soon after entering the orbit the nerve divides into two branches, the zygomaticotemporal and the zygomaticofacial nerves, which run within the orbit for only a short distance before passing onto the face through the lateral wall of the orbit. They may enter separate canals within the zygomatic bone or the zygomatic nerve itself may enter the bone before dividing.</div></section><section><a id="s0175"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0140">Zygomaticotemporal nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p0160">The zygomaticotemporal nerve traverses a canal in the zygomatic bone and emerges into the anterior part of the temporal fossa, where it ascends between the bone and temporalis before piercing the temporal fascia about 2<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm above the zygomatic arch to supply the skin of the temple. It communicates with the facial and auriculotemporal nerves. As it pierces the deep layer of the temporal fascia, it sends a slender twig between the two layers of the fascia towards the lateral angle of the eye. It was thought that the branch carried parasympathetic postganglionic fibres from the pterygopalatine ganglion to the lacrimal gland, but it is now believed that these fibres innervate the lacrimal gland directly.</div></section><section><a id="s0180"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0145">Zygomaticofacial nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p0165">The zygomaticofacial nerve traverses the inferolateral angle of the orbit and emerges on the face through a foramen in the zygomatic bone. It perforates orbicularis oculi to supply the skin on the prominence of the cheek and forms a plexus with zygomatic branches of the facial nerve and palpebral branches of the maxillary nerve. The nerve is absent occasionally.</div></section><section><a id="s0185"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0150">Infraorbital nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p0170">The infraorbital nerve can be regarded as the terminal branch of the maxillary nerve. It leaves the pterygopalatine fossa to enter the orbit at the inferior orbital fissure and at first it lies in the infraorbital groove on the floor of the orbit. As it approaches the rim of the orbit it runs into the infraorbital canal through which it passes to emerge onto the face at the infraorbital foramen, where it lies between levator labii superioris and levator anguli oris. It gives off palpebral, nasal and superior labial branches. The palpebral branches ascend deep to orbicularis oculi, pierce the muscle to supply the skin in the lower eyelid, and join the facial and zygomaticofacial nerves near the lateral canthus. Nasal branches supply the skin of the side of the nose, the vestibule and the movable part of the nasal septum, and join the external nasal branch of the anterior ethmoidal nerve. Superior labial branches, which are large and numerous, descend behind levator labii superioris to supply the skin of the anterior part of the cheek and upper lip. They are joined by branches from the facial nerve to form the infraorbital plexus.</div></section><section><a id="s0190"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0155">Orbital branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p0175">Fine orbital branches enter the orbit through the inferior orbital fissure and supply orbital periosteum. Some fibres also pass through the posterior ethmoidal foramen to supply the sphenoidal and ethmoidal sinuses. The orbital branches probably join branches of the internal carotid nerve to form a ‘retro-orbital’ plexus from which orbital structures such as the lacrimal gland and orbitalis receive an autonomic innervation.</div></section><section><a id="s0195"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0160">Posterior superior nasal nerves (lateral and medial)</p><div class="textfl" id="p0180">The posterior superior alveolar nerves enter the back of the nasal cavity through the sphenopalatine foramen. Lateral posterior superior nasal nerves innervate the mucosa covering the posterior part of the superior and middle nasal turbinates (conchae) and lining the posterior ethmoidal sinuses. Two or three medial posterior superior nasal nerves cross the nasal roof below the opening of the sphenoidal sinus to supply the mucosa of the posterior part of the roof and of the nasal septum.</div></section><section><a id="s0200"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0165">Nasopalatine nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p0185">The nasopalatine nerve leaves the pterygopalatine fossa through the sphenopalatine foramen and enters the nasal cavity. It passes across the cavity to the back of the nasal septum, runs downwards and forwards on the septum in a groove in the vomer, and then turns down through the incisive fossa in the anterior part of the hard palate to enter the roof of the mouth. When an anterior and a posterior incisive foramen exist in this fossa, the left nasopalatine nerve typically passes through the anterior foramen, and the right nerve passes through the posterior foramen. The nasopalatine nerve supplies the inferior part of the nasal septum and the anterior part of the hard palate, where it communicates with the greater palatine nerve.</div><div class="text" id="p0190">Surgical division of the nasopalatine nerve, for example during the removal of an ectopic canine tooth, causes no obvious sensory deficit in the anterior part of the palate, which suggests that either the territory of the greater palatine nerve reaches as far forwards as the gingivae lingual to the incisor teeth or that the nasopalatine nerve has significant regenerative potential.</div></section><section><a id="s0205"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0170">Palatine nerves (greater and lesser)</p><div class="textfl" id="p0195">The greater and lesser palatine nerves pass downwards from the pterygopalatine ganglion through the greater palatine canal. The greater palatine nerve descends through the greater palatine canal, emerges on the hard palate from the greater palatine foramen and runs forwards in a groove on the inferior surface of the bony palate almost to the incisor teeth. It supplies the gingivae, mucosa and glands of the hard palate and also communicates with the terminal filaments of the nasopalatine nerve. In the greater palatine canal it gives off posterior inferior nasal branches that emerge through the perpendicular plate of the palatine bone and ramify over the inferior nasal turbinate (concha) and walls of the middle and inferior meatuses. As it leaves the greater palatine canal, it gives off branches which are distributed to both surfaces of the adjacent part of the soft palate.</div><div class="text" id="p0200">The lesser (middle and posterior) palatine nerves are much smaller than the greater palatine nerve. They descend through the greater palatine canal, from which they diverge low down to emerge through the lesser palatine foramina in the tubercle or pyramidal process of the palatine bone. They innervate the uvula, tonsil and soft palate.</div><div class="text" id="p0205">Fibres conveying taste impulses from the palate probably pass via the palatine nerves to the pterygopalatine ganglion. They pass through the ganglion without synapsing, and leave via the greater petrosal nerve. Their cell bodies are located in the facial ganglion and their central processes pass via the sensory root of the facial nerve (nervus intermedius) to the gustatory nucleus in the nucleus of the tractus solitarius.</div></section><section><a id="s0210"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0175">Pharyngeal nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p0210">The pharyngeal branch of the maxillary nerve leaves the pterygopalatine ganglion posteriorly. It passes through the palatovaginal canal with the <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E17" id="pagebreak_1.464E17"/><a id="pg1464.e15"/>pharyngeal branch of the maxillary artery and supplies the mucosa of the nasopharynx behind the pharyngotympanic tube.</div></section><section><a id="s0215"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0180">Superior alveolar nerves</p><div class="textfl" id="p0215">The teeth in the upper jaw are supplied by the three superior alveolar (dental) nerves that arise from the maxillary nerve either in the pterygopalatine fossa or in the infraorbital groove and canal.</div><div class="text" id="p0220">The posterior superior alveolar (dental) nerve leaves the maxillary nerve in the pterygopalatine fossa and runs anteroinferiorly to pierce the infratemporal surface of the maxilla, at which point it is possible to perform a local anaesthetic block that will anaesthetize the pulps of the premolar and molar ipsilateral teeth; it then descends under the mucosa of the maxillary sinus. After supplying the lining of the sinus, the nerve divides into small branches that link up as the molar part of the superior alveolar plexus, supplying twigs to the molar teeth. It also supplies a branch to the upper molar gingivae and the adjoining part of the cheek.</div><div class="text" id="p0225">The middle superior alveolar (dental) nerve arises from the infraorbital nerve as it runs in the infraorbital groove, and runs downwards and forwards in the lateral wall of the maxillary sinus. It ends in small branches that link up with the superior dental plexus, supplying small rami to the upper premolar teeth. This nerve is variable; it may be duplicated, triplicated, or absent.</div><div class="text" id="p0230">The anterior superior alveolar (dental) nerve leaves the lateral side of the infraorbital nerve near the midpoint of its canal and traverses the canalis sinuosus in the anterior wall of the maxillary sinus. It curves first under the infraorbital foramen, then passes medially towards the nose, and finally turns downwards and divides into branches to supply the incisor and canine teeth. It assists in the formation of the superior dental plexus and gives off a nasal branch that passes through a minute canal in the lateral wall of the inferior meatus to supply the mucous membrane of the anterior area of the lateral wall as high as the opening of the maxillary sinus, and the floor of the nasal cavity near the anterior nasal spine. It communicates with the nasal branches of the pterygopalatine ganglion and finally emerges near the root of the anterior nasal spine to supply the adjoining part of the nasal septum.</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s0220"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0185">Mandibular nerve</h4><div class="textfl" id="p0235">The mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve is the largest division of the trigeminal nerve and is a mixed nerve. Its sensory branches supply the mandibular teeth and gingivae, the skin in the temporal region, part of the auricle and the lower lip, the lower part of the face and the mucosa of the anterior two-thirds (presulcal part) of the tongue and the floor of the oral cavity. The motor branches innervate the muscles of mastication, tensor veli palatini, tensor tympani, anterior belly of digastric and mylohyoid. The large sensory root emerges from the lateral part of the trigeminal ganglion and exits the cranial cavity through the foramen ovale. The small motor root passes under the ganglion and through the foramen ovale to unite with the sensory root just outside the skull. As it descends from the foramen ovale, the mandibular nerve is usually around 4<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm from the surface and a little anterior to the neck of the mandible. It immediately passes between tensor veli palatini, which is medial, and lateral pterygoid, which is lateral, gives off a meningeal branch and the nerve to medial pterygoid from its medial side, and then divides into a small anterior and large posterior trunk. The anterior trunk gives off branches to the four main muscles of mastication and a buccal branch which is sensory to the cheek. The posterior trunk gives off three main sensory branches, the auriculotemporal, lingual and inferior alveolar nerves, and motor fibres to supply mylohyoid and the anterior belly of digastric.</div><section><a id="s0225"/><section><a id="s0230"/><section><a id="s0235"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0190">Meningeal branch (nervus spinosus)</p><div class="textfl" id="p0240">The meningeal branch re-enters the middle cranial fossa through the foramen spinosum with the middle meningeal artery. It divides into anterior and posterior branches that accompany the main divisions of the middle meningeal artery and supply the dura mater in the middle cranial fossa and, to a lesser extent, in the anterior fossa and calvaria (see <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0015">Fig. 25.3B</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0240"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0195">Nerve to medial pterygoid</p><div class="textfl" id="p0245">The nerve to medial pterygoid is a slender ramus that enters the deep aspect of the muscle. It supplies one or two filaments that pass through the otic ganglion without interruption to supply tensor tympani and tensor veli palatini.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0245"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0200">Anterior trunk of mandibular nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0250">The anterior trunk of the mandibular nerve gives rise to the buccal nerve, which is sensory, and the masseteric, deep temporal and lateral pterygoid nerves, which are all motor.</div><section><a id="s0250"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0205">Buccal nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p0255">The buccal nerve passes between the two heads of lateral pterygoid, giving off motor fibres to the muscle as it passes through it. The nerve then descends deep to the tendon of temporalis, passes laterally anterior to masseter, and anastomoses with the buccal branches of the facial nerve. It may give off the anterior deep temporal nerve. The buccal nerve supplies sensation to the skin over the anterior part of buccinator, the corresponding buccal mucous membrane and the posterior part of the buccal gingivae opposite the second and third molar teeth. It may also give off a branch that passes through a small retromolar foramen to supply the molar teeth.</div></section><section><a id="s0255"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0210">Nerve to masseter</p><div class="textfl" id="p0260">The nerve to masseter passes laterally above lateral pterygoid onto the skull base, anterior to the temporomandibular joint and posterior to the tendon of temporalis. It crosses the posterior part of the mandibular notch with the masseteric artery and ramifies on and enters the deep surface of masseter. It provides articular branches to the temporomandibular joint.</div></section><section><a id="s0260"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0215">Deep temporal nerves</p><div class="textfl" id="p0265">There are usually two deep temporal nerves, anterior and posterior, although there may be a middle branch. They pass above lateral pterygoid to enter the deep surface of temporalis. The anterior branch may arise as a branch of the buccal nerve or from the nerve to masseter; the small posterior nerve sometimes arises in common with the nerve to masseter. Branches from the buccal nerve and the nerve to masseter may supply the inferior aspect of temporalis independently from the deep temporal nerves.</div></section><section><a id="s0265"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0220">Nerve to lateral pterygoid</p><div class="textfl" id="p0270">The nerve to lateral pterygoid enters the deep surface of the muscle. It may arise separately from the anterior division of the mandibular nerve or from the buccal nerve.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0270"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0225">Posterior trunk of mandibular nerve</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0275">The posterior trunk of the mandibular nerve is larger than the anterior and is mainly sensory, although it receives fibres from the motor root for the nerve to mylohyoid. It divides into auriculotemporal, lingual and inferior alveolar (dental) nerves.</div><section><a id="s0275"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0230">Auriculotemporal nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p0280">The auriculotemporal nerve usually has two roots that encircle the middle meningeal artery. It runs back under lateral pterygoid on the surface of tensor veli palatini, passes between the sphenomandibular ligament and the neck of the mandible, and then runs laterally behind the temporomandibular joint related to the upper part of the parotid gland. Emerging from behind the joint, it ascends over the posterior root of the zygoma, posterior to the superficial temporal vessels, and divides into superficial temporal branches. It communicates with the facial nerve and otic ganglion. The rami to the facial nerve, usually two, pass anterolaterally behind the neck of the mandible to join the facial nerve at the posterior border of masseter. Filaments from the otic ganglion join the roots of the auriculotemporal nerve close to their origin. The auriculotemporal nerve emerges onto the face behind the temporomandibular joint within the superior surface of the parotid gland, ascends posterior to the superficial temporal vessels, passes over the posterior root of the zygoma, and divides into superficial temporal branches. The cutaneous branches of the auriculotemporal nerve supply the tragus and part of the adjoining auricle of the ear and the posterior part of the temple. The nerve may be damaged during parotid gland surgery, resulting in impaired sensation over the tragus and temple. The auriculotemporal nerve communicates with the temporofacial division of the facial nerve, usually by two rami that pass anterolaterally behind the neck of the mandible. These communications anchor the facial nerve close to the lateral surface of the condylar process of the mandible and limit its mobility during surgery. Communications with the temporal and zygomatic branches of the facial nerve loop around the transverse facial and superficial temporal vessels.</div></section><section><a id="s0280"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0235">Lingual nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p0285">The lingual nerve is sensory to the mucosa of the floor of the mouth, mandibular lingual gingivae and mucosa of the presulcal part of the tongue (excluding the circumvallate papillae, which are supplied by the glossopharyngeal nerve). It also carries postganglionic parasympathetic fibres from the submandibular ganglion to the sublingual and anterior lingual glands. It arises from the posterior trunk of the mandibular nerve and at first runs beneath lateral pterygoid and superficial to tensor veli palatini, where it is joined by the chorda tympani branch of the <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E18" id="pagebreak_1.464E18"/><a id="pg1464.e16"/>facial nerve, and often by a branch of the inferior alveolar nerve. Emerging from under cover of lateral pterygoid, the lingual nerve then runs downwards and forwards on the surface of medial pterygoid, and is thus carried progressively closer to the medial surface of the mandibular ramus. It becomes intimately related to the bone a few millimetres below and behind the junction of the vertical ramus and horizontal body of the mandible. Here it lies anterior to, and slightly deeper than, the inferior alveolar (dental) nerve. It next passes below the mandibular attachment of the superior pharyngeal constrictor and pterygomandibular raphe, closely applied to the periosteum of the medial surface of the mandible, until it lies opposite the posterior root of the lower third molar tooth, where it is covered only by the gingival mucoperiosteum. At this point it usually lies approximately 3<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm below the alveolar crest with a mean distance from the bone of 2<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm: it may be in direct contact with the bone (25%) or lie above the alveolar crest (15%). The nerve next passes medial to the mandibular origin of mylohyoid, and this carries it progressively away from the mandible, separating it from the alveolar bone covering the mesial root of the lower third molar tooth. It then passes downwards and forwards on the deep surface of mylohyoid (i.e. the surface nearer the mucosa covering the floor of the mouth), crossing the lingual sulcus beneath the mucosa. In this position, the lingual nerve lies on the deep portion of the submandibular gland, which bulges over the top of the posterior border of mylohyoid. The nerve passes below the submandibular duct, which crosses it from medial to lateral, and curves upwards, forwards and medially to enter the tongue by medial and lateral branches. Within the tongue, the medial branch sends small branches to the medial part of the ventrolateral tongue, and the lateral branch runs along the lateral border of the tongue and sends larger branches to innervate the mucosa of the anterior tip of the tongue. The lingual nerve is connected to the submandibular ganglion by two or three branches. It forms connecting loops with twigs of the hypoglossal nerve at the anterior margin of hyoglossus (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib34" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_34">Fitzgerald and Law 1958</a>) and within the tongue (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib142" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_142">Zur et al 2004</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0290">The lingual nerve is at risk during surgical removal of (impacted) lower third molars: patients occasionally develop lingual sensory disturbance postoperatively but this is rarely persistent (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib98" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_98">Renton 2011</a>). The nerve is also at risk during operations to remove the submandibular salivary gland because the submandibular duct must be dissected from the lingual nerve, and also because its connection to the submandibular ganglion pulls it into the operating field.</div></section><section><a id="s0285"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0240">Inferior alveolar (dental) nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p0295">The inferior alveolar nerve descends behind lateral pterygoid. At the lower border of the muscle the nerve passes between the sphenomandibular ligament and the mandibular ramus and enters the mandibular canal via the mandibular foramen. Just before entering the mandibular canal, the inferior alveolar nerve gives off a small mylohyoid branch that also carries fibres that innervate the anterior belly of digastric. Below lateral pterygoid, the nerve is accompanied by the inferior alveolar artery, a branch of the first part of the maxillary artery, which enters the canal with its associated veins. In the mandibular canal, the inferior alveolar nerve runs downwards and forwards, generally below the apices of the teeth until it is below the first and second premolars, where it divides into terminal incisive and mental branches. The incisive branch continues forwards in a bony canal or in a plexiform arrangement, giving off branches to the first premolar, canine and incisor teeth, and to the associated labial gingivae. The lower central incisor teeth receive a bilateral innervation, fibres probably crossing the midline within the periosteum to re-enter the bone via numerous canals in the labial cortical plate. The mental nerve passes upwards, backwards and outwards to emerge from the mandible via the mental foramen between and just below the apices of the premolar teeth. It immediately divides into three branches, two of which pass upwards and forwards to form an incisor plexus labial to the teeth that supplies the labial gingivae (and probably the periosteum). From this plexus and from the dental branches, fibres turn downwards and then lingually to emerge on the lingual surface of the mandible on the posterior aspect of the mental symphysis or opposite the premolar teeth, probably communicating with the lingual or mylohyoid nerves. The third branch of the mental nerve passes through the intermingled fibres of depressor anguli oris and platysma to supply the skin of the lower lip and chin. Branches of the mental nerve communicate with terminal filaments of the mandibular branch of the facial nerve.</div></section><section><a id="s0290"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0245">Nerve to mylohyoid</p><div class="textfl" id="p0300">The nerve to mylohyoid is given off from the inferior alveolar nerve just before that nerve enters the mandibular canal. It pierces the sphenomandibular ligament and enters a shallow groove on the medial surface of the mandible, following a course roughly parallel to its parent nerve. It passes below the origin of mylohyoid to lie on the superficial surface of the muscle, between it and the anterior belly of digastric, both of which it supplies. Although primarily a motor nerve supplying mylohyoid and the anterior belly of digastric, the mylohyoid nerve carries some sensory fibres that may enter the mandible via one or more small retromental foramina in the vicinity of the genial tubercles to supply some sensation to the anterior teeth, and it may also give a few filaments to supply the skin over the point of the chin.</div></section><section><a id="s0295"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0250">Dental extractions</p><div class="textfl" id="p0305">Variations in the fascicular organization of the inferior alveolar nerve are clinically important when extracting impacted third molars. The nerve may appear as a single bundle lying a few millimetres below the roots of the teeth, or it may lie much lower and almost reach the lower border of the bone, so that it gives off a variable number of large rami that pass anterosuperiorly towards the roots before dividing to supply the teeth and interdental septa. Only rarely is it plexiform. The nerve may lie on the lingual or buccal side of the mandible (slightly more commonly on the buccal side). Even when the third molar tooth is in a normal position, the nerve may be so intimately related to it that it grooves its root. Exceptionally, the nerve may be similarly related to the second molar tooth.</div><div class="text" id="p0310">Failure to achieve complete anaesthesia to the mandibular teeth following an inferior alveolar nerve block (which should anaesthetize the nerve before it enters the mandibular canal) suggests that there are alternative pathways for sensory nerves to innervate the teeth. Knowledge of these pathways is important in helping clinicians to obtain complete dental anaesthesia. There are anatomical variations in the distribution of the inferior alveolar nerve, the buccal branch of the mandibular nerve, the mylohyoid nerve, the lingual nerve, the deep temporal nerves and the cervical plexus. The inferior alveolar nerve may give multiple branches before entering the mandibular canal that may re-enter the mandible via small accessory foramina in the retromolar region to supply sensation to the molar teeth: one or more of these branches may escape anaesthesia following inferior alveolar nerve block. If a successful inferior alveolar nerve block does not completely anaesthetize teeth in a jaw quadrant, additional local injections of anaesthetic solution around the tooth in question may be necessary to block alternative pathways. There is also the possibility of overlap across the midline involving the incisive and mylohyoid nerves. In children, there is evidence to suggest that the lingula is variable in position and its position from the occlusion plane increases with age: it is therefore not considered an appropriate landmark for inferior alveolar nerve block.</div></section><section><a id="s0300"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0255">Neural connections between branches of trigeminal and other nerves</p><div class="textfl" id="p0315">Communications exist between the inferior alveolar and lingual nerves. If the lingual nerve is not anaesthetized during an inferior alveolar nerve block, this pathway could account for any remaining sensation in the teeth. Although the deep temporal nerves are primarily motor, it has been suggested that terminal branches may pass from the substance of temporalis to enter the mandible through foramina in the retromolar region to supply some sensation to molar teeth. In the cervical plexus, the great auricular nerve, formed by the anterior primary rami of the second and third cervical spinal nerves, supplies skin over the angle of the mandible: it is possible that this nerve may provide a branch that penetrates the mandible to supply one or more of the cheek teeth.</div></section></section></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s0305"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle0260">Abducens Nerve</h2><div class="textfl" id="p0320">The abducens nerve is the sixth cranial nerve and innervates the ipsilateral lateral rectus.</div><section><a id="s0315"/><section><a id="s0320"/><h3 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0265">Abducens nucleus and central connections</h3><div class="textfl" id="p0325">The abducens nucleus lies in the floor of the fourth ventricle, just lateral to the midline, immediately subjacent to the facial colliculus and slightly lateral to the medial longitudinal fasciculus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000288/B9780702077050000288.xhtml#f0025">Fig. 28.4</a>). The abducens nucleus is composed of approximately 6500 neurones that align with the trochlear, oculomotor and hypoglossal nuclei to form the general somatic efferent column (GSE). Within the nucleus, large motor neurones are intermixed with small multipolar interneurones, the latter being most heavily concentrated in the lateral and ventral aspects of the nucleus. The abducens nucleus receives afferent connections from multiple sources, including corticonuclear fibres (principally contralateral, some of the fibres are aberrant corticospinal fibres that descend from the midbrain to this level in the medial lemniscus); the medial longitudinal fasciculus (connecting the abducens nucleus to oculomotor, <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E19" id="pagebreak_1.464E19"/><a id="pg1464.e17"/>trochlear and vestibular nuclei); the tectobulbar tract (from the deep layers of the superior colliculus); the paramedian pontine reticular formation (rostral and caudal to the nucleus); the nucleus prepositus hypoglossi; and the contralateral medullary reticular formation.</div></section></section><section><a id="s2015"/><section><a id="s2016"/><section><a id="s2017"/><h4 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle2018">Neural Control of Gaze</h4><div class="textfl" id="p2019">Although the detailed anatomical substrates for the different types of eye movement differ, they share common neural circuitry that lies mainly in the pons and midbrain, for horizontal and vertical gaze movements, respectively (see <a href="../B9780702077050000446/B9780702077050000446.xhtml#f0080">Fig. 44.12</a>). The common element for all types of horizontal gaze movements is the abducens nucleus. It contains motor neurones that innervate the ipsilateral lateral rectus and interneurones that project via the medial longitudinal fasciculus to the contralateral oculomotor nucleus, which controls medial rectus. A lesion of the abducens nucleus leads to a total loss of ipsilateral horizontal conjugate gaze. A lesion of the medial longitudinal fasciculus produces slowed or absent adduction of the ipsilateral eye, usually associated with jerky movements (nystagmus) of the contralateral abducting eye, a syndrome called internuclear ophthalmoplegia (Leigh and Zee 2015). The gaze motor command involves specialized areas of the reticular formation of the brainstem, which receive a variety of supranuclear inputs. The main region for the generation of horizontal saccades is the paramedian pontine reticular formation, located on each side of the midline in the central paramedian part of the tegmentum, and extending from the pontomedullary junction to the pontopeduncular junction. Each paramedian pontine reticular formation contains excitatory neurones (referred to as ‘burst’ neurones) that discharge at high frequencies just prior to and during ipsilateral saccades. Excitatory burst neurones make monosynaptic connections with the ipsilateral abducens nucleus. Omnipause neurones in the pontine nucleus raphe interpositus, located in the midline between the rootlets of the abducens nerves, discharge tonically during fixation but stop firing immediately prior to a saccade. They appear to exert an inhibitory influence on the burst neurones and act as a switch to change from fixation to saccadic mode (Ramat et al 2007).</div><div class="text" id="p2020">The tonic activity of neurones in the nucleus prepositus hypoglossi and medial vestibular nucleus is thought to provide an eye position signal to maintain the eccentric position of the eye against the viscoelastic forces in the orbit. These forces tend to move the eyeball back to looking straight ahead, i.e. the primary position, after a saccade. Vestibular nuclei and the perihypoglossal complex project directly to the abducens nuclei: these projections probably also carry smooth pursuit signals, via the cerebellum.</div><div class="text" id="p2021">The final common pathway for vertical gaze movements is formed by the oculomotor and trochlear nuclei. The rostral interstitial nucleus of the medial longitudinal fasciculus contains both excitatory burst neurones that discharge in relation to up-and-down vertical saccadic movements and project to motor neurones involved in vertical gaze, and omnipause neurones that act similarly to those for horizontal gaze. The rostral interstitial nucleus of the medial longitudinal fasciculus projects through the posterior commissure to its equivalent on the other side of the mesencephalon for upgaze, as well as directly to the ipsilateral oculomotor and trochlear nuclei for downgaze (see <a href="../B9780702077050000446/B9780702077050000446.xhtml#f0080">Fig. 44.12</a>). Neurones in and around the interstitial nucleus of Cajal, which lies slightly caudal to the rostral interstitial nucleus of the medial longitudinal fasciculus, provide signals for vertical gaze holding. Vertical gaze palsies can affect upgaze, downgaze or both. Lesions within the posterior commissure predominantly give rise to disturbances in upgaze, associated with other signs of dorsal midbrain syndrome, e.g. pupillary abnormalities (light–near dissociation). Discrete lesions placed more ventrally in the region of the rostral interstitial nucleus of the medial longitudinal fasciculus may cause mixed up-and-down, or mainly downgaze disturbances (Leigh and Zee 2015).</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s0325"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle0270">Intra- and extracranial course</h3><div class="textfl" id="p0330">The axons of the motor neurones in the abducens nucleus spread diffusely from the ventromedial aspect of the nucleus. Fifteen to twenty fascicles pass ventrally, laterally and caudally, directly through the intervening reticular formation, trapezoid body, medial lemniscus, pontocerebellar fibres, pontine nuclei and descending corticospinal tracts to emerge from the brainstem at the pontomedullary sulcus about 1–2<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm lateral to the midline. In their course, the rootlets typically coalesce to emerge from the brainstem as a compact bundle of fibres. Occasionally all or some of the rootlets may emerge rostral to the pontomedullary sulcus. The nerve runs upward, anteriorly and slightly laterally across the prepontine cistern between the pons and clivus, pierces the inner layer of dura mater and runs through the inferior venous compartment of the petroclival venous confluence in a bow-shaped canal, Dorello’s canal. It then bends sharply across the upper border of the petrous part of the temporal bone to enter the cavernous sinus, where it lies lateral to the cavernous segment of the internal carotid artery but medial to the oculomotor, trochlear, ophthalmic and maxillary nerves that also course through the sinus (but merely invaginate the lateral dural wall of the sinus). The abducens nerve enters the orbit through the inferomedial part of the superior orbital fissure, within the common tendinous ring, at first below, and then between, the two divisions of the oculomotor nerve and lateral to the nasociliary nerve (see <a href="../B9780702077050000446/B9780702077050000446.xhtml#f0095">Fig. 44.15</a>). It passes forwards to enter the medial (ocular) surface of lateral rectus, most often in the posterior one-third of the muscle (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib04" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_04">Joo et al 2012</a>).</div></section></section>


<section><a id="s0330"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle0275">Facial nerve</h2><div class="textfl" id="p0335">The facial nerve is the seventh cranial nerve. It contains special visceral/branchial efferent (SVE) motor axons that supply muscles derived from the second branchial arch, namely the mimetic facial muscles, buccinator, stapedius, platysma, the posterior belly of digastric and stylohyoid. The craniofacial muscles innervated by the facial nerve typically lack muscle spindles: proprioceptive information may be mediated by modified cutaneous mechanoreceptors or capsular corpuscle-like structures within the muscles. The facial nerve contains two, possibly three, types of sensory axon. Special visceral afferent (SVA) axons carry taste from the anterior two-thirds of the tongue via the chorda tympani, and general sensory afferent (GSA) axons carry cutaneous sensation, including pain, from the posterior aspect of the external acoustic meatus, with the caveat that the innervation of this region is complex and largely contributed by Arnold’s nerve: these axons are thought to be responsible for coughing during cerumen removal, idiopathic otalgia, Hitselberger’s sign and to be the site of vesicular eruptions in Ramsay Hunt syndrome.</div><div class="text" id="p0340">General visceral efferent (GVE) fibres in the facial nerve arise from preganglionic parasympathetic neurones in the superior salivatory nucleus and pass via either the chorda tympani to the submandibular ganglion or the greater petrosal nerve and the nerve of the pterygoid canal to the pterygopalatine ganglion. The GVE, SVA, GSA axons form the nervus intermedius (intermediate nerve, nerve of Wrisberg).</div><section><a id="s0335"/><section><a id="s0340"/><h3 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0280">Facial nucleus and central connections</h3><div class="textfl" id="p0345">The facial (motor) nucleus is situated caudal, ventral and lateral to the abducens nucleus. It lies within the caudal pontine reticular formation, ventromedial to the spinal tract and nucleus of the trigeminal nerve (see <a href="../B9780702077050000288/B9780702077050000288.xhtml#f0060">Figs 28.11</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000288/B9780702077050000288.xhtml#f0070">28.13</a>) (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib1a" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_1a">Haines and Mihailoff 2017</a>). Groups of neurones form columns that innervate individual muscles or that correspond to branches of the facial nerve. The facial nucleus receives corticonuclear fibres for volitional control of the facial musculature. Within the nucleus, neurones that innervate the muscles of the scalp and upper face are innervated by bilateral corticonuclear fibres. They lie dorsal to the neurones that innervate the muscles of the lower face, which receive a predominately contralateral innervation. Clinically, therefore, upper and lower motor neurone lesions affecting the facial nerve can be differentiated because upper motor neurone lesions cause paralysis that is confined to the contralateral lower face (supranuclear facial palsy), whilst lower motor neurone lesions cause complete ipsilateral facial paralysis (Bell’s palsy). The facial nucleus also receives ipsilateral afferents from the nucleus solitarius and from the sensory nucleus of the trigeminal nerve, establishing important reflex connections.</div><div class="text" id="p0350">Efferent fibres that arise from large motor neurones of the facial nucleus form the motor root of the facial nerve. At first, the facial fibres course dorsomedially towards the floor of the fourth ventricle as a diffuse spread of fibres that pass dorsal and medial to the abducens nucleus. They then coalesce into a defined fibre bundle that re-curves dorsally and laterally over the rostral pole of the abducens nucleus, creating a bulge in the floor of the fourth ventricle, the facial colliculus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000288/B9780702077050000288.xhtml#f0060">Fig. 28.11</a>). The fibres descend ventrolaterally through the reticular formation and pass between their nucleus of origin medially and the nucleus of the spinal tract of the trigeminal nerve laterally. The facial nerve emerges from the brainstem at the supraolivary fossette, between the olive and restiform body, and passes laterally through the cerebellopontine angle cistern to the porus acusticus of the internal acoustic meatus (internal auditory canal).</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s0445"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle0350">Vestibulocochlear Nerve</h2><div class="textfl" id="p0440">The vestibulocochlear nerve is the eighth cranial nerve. As its name suggests, it consists of two components, the vestibular nerve, concerned with balance, and the cochlear nerve, concerned with hearing.</div><section><a id="s0455"/><section><a id="s0460"/><h3 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0360">Vestibular nuclei and central connections</h3><div class="textfl" id="p0455">The vestibular nuclear complex is situated beneath the floor of the fourth ventricle. It has traditionally been divided into four cellular masses, the lateral nucleus (of Deiter), medial nucleus (of Schwalbe), superior nucleus (of Bechterew) and inferior (spinal, descending) vestibular nucleus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000288/B9780702077050000288.xhtml#f0045">Figs 28.8</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000288/B9780702077050000288.xhtml#f0060">28.11</a>) (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib1a" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Haines and Mihailoff 2017</a>). The nucleus prepositus hypoglossi, located medial to the medial vestibular nucleus, may also be regarded as a vestibular nucleus. Cell groups X and Y have been identified as accessory nuclei of the vestibular complex.</div><div class="text" id="p0460">The medial vestibular nucleus is the largest of the vestibular nuclei. It lies lateral and superior to the visceromotor nuclei of the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves, is crossed dorsally by the striae medullares of the fourth ventricle and is continuous with the nucleus intercalatus below. The superior vestibular nucleus is small and lies above the medial and lateral nuclei. It extends higher into the pons than the other subdivisions and occupies the upper part of the vestibular area. The inferior vestibular nucleus is the smallest of the group. It lies between the medial vestibular nucleus and the restiform body, from the level of the upper end of the nucleus gracilis to the pontomedullary junction, and is traversed by descending fibres of the vestibular nerve, from the cerebellum and the vestibulospinal tract. The lateral vestibular nucleus lies ventrolateral to the upper portion of the medial nucleus, just above the inferior nucleus and ascends almost to the level of the abducens nucleus. Its rostral end is continuous with the caudal end of the superior nucleus. It projects to the spinal cord through the lateral vestibulospinal tract (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib130" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_130">Voogd 2016</a>). The lateral vestibular nucleus can be subdivided into dorsal and ventral components. The dorsal portion contains giant cells and is located within the juxtarestiform body: it receives no direct vestibular afferents, but receives Purkinje cell axons from the anterior vermis, and extends efferent connections to the cerebellum. The ventral portion contains cells of various sizes and is located medial to the juxtarestiform body</div><div class="text" id="p0465">Vestibulocerebellar fibres (primary and secondary) travel via the juxtarestiform body mainly to the flocculus and nodule. Cerebellovestibular fibres pass to the nuclei, also via the juxtarestiform body: they arise mainly in the flocculus and nodule (posterior lobe), but some fibres are derived from the anterior lobe and the fastigial nucleus. A few vestibular fibres enter the cerebellum directly through the juxtarestiform body and end in the fastigial nucleus, flocculonodular lobe and uvula.</div><div class="text" id="p0470">The vestibular nuclei receive afferent fibres from multiple sources, including the vestibular portion of the vestibulocochlear nerve, cerebellum, brainstem reticular formation and spinal cord. Myelinated fibres in the vestibular nerve enter the medulla between the restiform body and the spinal tract of the trigeminal nerve and bifurcate into ascending and descending branches. Most ascending vestibular fibres end in the superior vestibular nucleus. Descending vestibular fibres traverse the juxtarestiform body and give off extensive transverse collaterals to the inferior and medial (but not the lateral) vestibular nuclei. Additional afferent fibres descend from the cerebral cortex to innervate the vestibular nuclei bilaterally.</div><div class="text" id="p0475">Afferent fibres arising from the interstitial nucleus of Cajal descend through the medial longitudinal fasciculus to synapse in the ipsilateral superior and medial vestibular nuclei and the nucleus prepositius hypoglossi. Afferent fibres from the Edinger–Westphal nucleus project to the medial and inferior vestibular nuclei, which also receive root fibres from the upper cervical nerve roots (C2, C3). The lateral vestibular nucleus and inferior portions of the medial and inferior vestibular nuclei receive ipsilateral spinovestibular fibres that ascend from lower spinal levels through the dorsal spinocerebellar tract.</div><div class="text" id="p0480">The vestibular nuclei project extensively to the cerebellum and also receive fibres from the cerebellar cortex and the fastigial nuclei. Vestibulocerebellar fibres pass through the juxtarestiform body to the cerebellum (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib21" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_21">Carpenter and Sutin 1983</a>). A few vestibular nerve fibres bypass the vestibular nuclei and traverse the juxtarestiform body to terminate directly in the fastigial nucleus, the flocculonodular lobe and uvula.</div><div class="text" id="p0485">Evidence suggests that the vestibular apparatus is spatially represented in these nuclei. Efferents from the lateral vestibular nucleus descend to the spinal cord through the ipsilateral lateral vestibulospinal tract and extend along the full length of the spinal cord to exert a facilitatory influence on spinal reflex activity and on extensor muscle tone. Vestibular nuclear efferents form a major part of the medial longitudinal fasciculus, through which interconnections between the vestibular and oculogyric nuclei and the pontine reticular formation enable conjugate eye movements that compensate for head movements perceived by the labyrinths. The reflex arcs stabilize visual fixation despite changing head position. Vestibular efferents project to the thalamus (probably via the posterior portions of the ventroposterior complex and the medial pulvinar), which in turn projects to the primary vestibular cortex in the parietal lobe at the junction of the intraparietal and postcentral sulci, adjacent to the head portion of the postcentral gyrus. There may be additional representation of the vestibular system in the superior temporal gyrus near to the auditory cortex.</div></section></section><section><a id="s8465"/><section><a id="s0465"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0365">Vestibular ganglion</h4><div class="textfl" id="p0490">The somata of the bipolar neurones that form the vestibular nerve are in the vestibular (Scarpa’s) ganglion located in the trunk of the nerve within the lateral end of the internal acoustic meatus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000434/B9780702077050000434.xhtml#f0070">Fig. 43.12B</a>). They vary considerably in size, with circumferences ranging from 45 to 160<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>μm (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib33" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_33">Felix et al 1987</a>): no topographically ordered distribution relating to size has been found. The somata are notable for their abundant granular endoplasmic reticulum, which in places forms Nissl bodies, and prominent Golgi complexes. They are covered by a thin layer of satellite cells and are often arranged in pairs, closely abutting each other so that only a thin layer of endoneurium separates the adjacent coverings of satellite cells. This arrangement has led to speculation that ganglion cells may affect each other directly by electrotonic spread (ephaptic transmission: see <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib33" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Felix et al (1987)</a>). Two distinct sympathetic components have been identified in the vestibular ganglion, a perivascular adrenergic system derived from the stellate ganglion, and a blood vessel-independent system derived from the superior cervical ganglion.</div><div class="text" id="p0495">The central processes of the vestibular ganglion cells travel via the vestibular nerve, enter the brainstem at the cerebellopontine angle and terminate in the vestibular nuclear complex (see below). Neurones in this complex project to motor nuclei in the brainstem and upper spinal cord, and to the cerebellum and thalamus. Thalamic efferent projections pass <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E22" id="pagebreak_1.464E22"/><a id="pg1464.e20"/>to a cortical vestibular area that is probably located near the intraparietal sulcus in area 2 of the primary somatosensory cortex.</div><div class="text" id="p0500">The peripheral processes of the vestibular ganglion cells are aggregated into definable nerves, each with a specific distribution. The main nerve divides at and within the ganglion into superior and inferior divisions connected by an isthmus. The superior division, the larger of the two, passes through the small holes in the superior vestibular area at the fundus of the internal acoustic meatus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000434/B9780702077050000434.xhtml#f0020">Fig. 43.3</a>) and supplies the ampullary crests of the lateral and anterior semicircular canals via the lateral and anterior ampullary nerves, respectively. A secondary branch of the lateral ampullary nerve supplies the macula of the utricle; however, the greater part of the utricular macula is innervated by the utricular nerve, which is a separate branch of the superior division. Another branch of the superior division supplies part of the saccule. The inferior division passes through small holes in the inferior vestibular area (see <a href="../B9780702077050000434/B9780702077050000434.xhtml#f0020">Fig. 43.3</a>) to supply the remainder of the saccule and the posterior ampullary crest via saccular and singular branches, respectively; the latter passes through the foramen singulare. Occasionally, a very small supplementary or accessory branch innervates the posterior crest; it is probably a vestigial remnant of the crista neglecta, an additional area of sensory epithelium found in some other mammals but seldom in humans.</div><div class="text" id="p0505">Afferent and efferent cochlear fibres are also present in the inferior division of the vestibular nerve but leave at the anastomosis of Oort to join the main cochlear nerve (see review by <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib12a" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_12a">Warr (1992)</a>). Another anastomosis, the vestibulofacial anastomosis, is situated more centrally between the facial and vestibular nerves and is the point at which fibres originating in the intermediate nerve pass from the vestibular nerve to the main trunk of the facial nerve.</div><div class="text" id="p0510">There are approximately 20,000 fibres in the vestibular nerve, of which 12,000 travel in the superior division and 8000 travel in the inferior division. The distribution of fibre diameters is bimodal, with peaks at 4<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>μm and 6.5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>μm. The smaller fibres go mainly to the type II hair cells and the larger fibres tend to supply the type I hair cells. In addition to the afferents, efferent and autonomic fibres have been identified. Efferent fibres synapse exclusively with the afferent calyceal terminals around type I cells and usually with the afferent boutons on type II cells, although a few are in direct contact with the cell bodies of type II cells. The autonomic fibres do not contact vestibular sensory cells but terminate beneath the sensory epithelia.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0475"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle0370">Cochlear nuclei and central connections</h3><div class="textfl" id="p0515">The primary afferents of the auditory pathway are the central processes of type I and II sensory neurones in the spiral ganglion of Corti in the cochlea. They travel in the cochlear division of the vestibulocochlear nerve and enter the brainstem just caudal to the vestibular division of the vestibulocochlear nerve at the cerebellopontine angle. The axons bifurcate and terminate in the dorsal (posterior) and ventral (anterior) cochlear nuclei lying along the lateral surface of the restiform body. The dorsal cochlear nucleus forms a bulge, the auditory tubercle (auditory eminence) on the posterior surface of the restiform body and also forms the floor of the lateral recess of the fourth ventricle; it is continuous medially with the vestibular area in the floor of the fourth ventricle (see <a href="../B9780702077050000288/B9780702077050000288.xhtml#f0050">Fig. 28.9</a>). The ventral cochlear nucleus lies between the cochlear and vestibular fibres of the vestibulocochlear nerve. The dorsal and ventral cochlear nuclei are separated only by a thin stratum of nerve cell bodies and fibres.</div><div class="text" id="p0520">The axons of type 1 spiral ganglion cells enter the ventral cochlear nucleus and bifurcate within its centre, dividing it into anterior and posterior ventral subnuclei. The fibres are organized into dorsoventrally oriented sheets in which fibres conveying low frequency sounds from apical spiral ganglion cells terminate ventrally and fibres conveying high frequency sounds from the basal turn of the spiral ganglion terminate dorsally. Posterior processes of type I ganglion cells pass to the caudal pole of the ventral nucleus, from which they enter the dorsal cochlear nucleus. Thin unmyelinated axons of type 2 spiral ganglion cells contact clusters of small interneurones scattered through the cochlear nuclei.</div><div class="text" id="p0525">The axons that emerge from the cochlear nuclei are aggregated into three, mostly transverse, fibre bundles, the dorsal and intermediate acoustic striae and the trapezoid body. The dorsal cochlear nucleus projects via the dorsal acoustic stria to the contralateral inferior colliculus. The dorsal acoustic stria curves dorsally and medially, dorsal to the restiform body, traverses the reticular formation ventral to the striae medullares, crosses the midline, passes to the contralateral superior olivary complex, and ascends in the contralateral lateral lemniscus. The ventral cochlear nucleus projects via the trapezoid body or the intermediate acoustic stria to relay centres in either the superior olivary complex, the nuclei of the lateral lemniscus, or the inferior colliculus. Initially, the intermediate acoustic stria accompanies the dorsal acoustic stria as they pass medially, immediately dorsal to the restiform body, but it then separates from the dorsal acoustic stria, angles sharply ventrally in the ipsilateral tegmentum, passes through the spinal trigeminal nucleus, joins the trapezoid body, and crosses the midline to join and ascend with the contralateral lateral lemniscus.</div><div class="text" id="p0530">The cochlear nerve also conveys efferent fibres that pass outward from the brainstem to terminate on the hair cells and on the cells of the spiral ganglion.</div></section><section><a id="s2025"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle0355">Intratemporal and intracranial course</h3><div class="textfl" id="p0445">The vestibulocochlear nerve emerges from the cerebellopontine angle (see <a href="../B9780702077050000288/B9780702077050000288.xhtml#f0025">Figs 28.4</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000288/B9780702077050000288.xhtml#f0030">28.5</a>). It courses through the posterior cranial fossa in close association with the facial nerve, nervus intermedius and labyrinthine vessels. Together with these structures, it enters the petrous temporal bone via the porus acusticus of the internal acoustic meatus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000434/B9780702077050000434.xhtml#f0020">Fig. 43.3</a>), and divides into an anterior trunk, the cochlear nerve, and a posterior trunk, the vestibular nerve. Both contain the centrally directed axons of bipolar neurones, together with a smaller number of efferent fibres that arise from brainstem neurones and terminate on cochlear and vestibular sensory neurones. In humans, the intratemporal portion of the vestibulocochlear nerve consists of two histologically distinct portions: a central glial zone adjacent to the brainstem, and a peripheral or non-glial zone (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib15" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_15">Bridger and Farkashidy 1980</a>). In the glial zone, the axons are supported by central neuroglia, whereas in the non-glial zone they are ensheathed by Schwann cells. The non-glial zone sometimes extends into the cerebellopontine angle medial to the internal acoustic meatus in human vestibulocochlear nerves. During development, a gap of several weeks has been reported between the onset of Schwann cell myelination distally and glial myelination proximally; it has been suggested that the gap may coincide with the time of the final maturation of the organ of Corti. For further details about the development of the human cochlear nerve, see <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib9a" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_9a">Ray et al (2005)</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0450">In audiological practice, it is important to distinguish between intratemporal and intracranial lesions. However, this surgical distinction does not correlate with the precise anatomical description of peripheral and central portions of the auditory and vestibular systems. Clinically, the term ‘peripheral auditory lesion’ is used to describe lesions peripheral to the spiral ganglion, and the term ‘peripheral vestibular disturbance’ includes lesions of the vestibular ganglion and the entire vestibular nerve.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0480"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle0375">Glossopharyngeal Nerve</h2><div class="textfl" id="p0535">The glossopharyngeal nerve is the ninth cranial nerve (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0045">Figs 35.8</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0060">35.11</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0100">35.19</a>). It contains motor fibres to stylopharyngeus; parasympathetic secretomotor fibres to the parotid gland (derived from the inferior salivatory nucleus); sensory fibres to the tympanic cavity, pharyngotympanic tube, fauces, tonsils, nasopharynx, uvula and posterior (postsulcal) third of the tongue; and gustatory fibres from the circumvallate papillae.</div><section><a id="s0490"/><section><a id="s0495"/><h3 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0380">Nucleus ambiguus</h3><div class="textfl" id="p0540">The nucleus ambiguus is a complex group of large motor neurones situated deep in the medullary reticular formation (see <a href="../B9780702077050000288/B9780702077050000288.xhtml#f0020">Figs 28.3</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000288/B9780702077050000288.xhtml#f0050">28.9</a>). Rostrally, it extends as far as the rostral end of the vagal nucleus and caudally it is in line with, but not continuous with, the nucleus of the accessory nerve. A small retrofacial nucleus separates the upper end of the nucleus ambiguus from the facial nucleus. The nucleus ambiguus contains cellular subgroups that exhibit some topographical representation. Relatively discrete groups of cells in the caudal region innervate individual laryngeal muscles; neurones in the intermediate area innervate the pharynx; neurones in the rostral area innervate the oesophagus and soft palate.</div><div class="text" id="p0545">The nucleus ambiguus contributes special visceral efferent fibres to the glossopharyngeal nerve and may give general visceral efferent fibres to the vagus nerve. Fibres emerging from the nucleus ambiguus pass dorsomedially, then curve laterally. Rostral fibres join the glossopharyngeal nerve and caudal fibres join the vagus nerve and are distributed to the pharyngeal constrictors, intrinsic laryngeal muscles and striated muscles of the palate and upper oesophagus. A specific caudal pool of laryngeal motor neurones gives rise to the recurrent laryngeal nerve.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0500"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle0385">Extracranial course</h3><div class="textfl" id="p0550">The glossopharyngeal nerve leaves the skull through the anteromedial part of the jugular foramen, anterior to the vagus and accessory nerves, <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.4640000000000001E23" id="pagebreak_1.4640000000000001E23"/><a id="pg1464.e21"/>and in a separate dural sheath. In the foramen, it is lodged in a deep groove leading from the cochlear aqueductal depression, separated by the inferior petrosal sinus from the vagus and accessory nerves. The groove is bridged by fibrous tissue, which is sometimes calcified. After leaving the foramen, the nerve passes forwards between the internal jugular vein and internal carotid artery, and then descends anterior to the latter, deep to the styloid process and its attached muscles, to reach the posterior border of stylopharyngeus. It curves forwards on stylopharyngeus and either pierces the lower fibres of the superior pharyngeal constrictor or passes between it and the middle constrictor to be distributed to the palatine tonsil, the mucosae of the pharynx and postsulcal part of the tongue, the vallate papillae and oral mucous glands.</div><div class="text" id="p0555">Two ganglia, superior and inferior, are situated on the glossopharyngeal nerve as it traverses the jugular foramen. The superior ganglion is in the upper part of the groove occupied by the nerve in the jugular foramen. It is small, has no branches and is usually regarded as a detached part of the inferior ganglion. The inferior ganglion is larger and lies in a notch in the lower border of the petrous part of the temporal bone. Its cells are typical unipolar neurones, their peripheral branches convey gustatory and tactile signals from the mucosa of the tongue (posterior third, including the sulcus terminalis and vallate papillae) and general sensation from the oropharynx, where the glossopharyngeal nerve is responsible for initiating the gag reflex.</div><div class="text" id="p0560">The glossopharyngeal nerve has tympanic, carotid, pharyngeal, muscular, tonsillar and lingual branches.</div><section><a id="s0505"/><section><a id="s0510"/><section><a id="s0515"/><section><a id="s0520"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0390">Communicating branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p0565">The glossopharyngeal nerve communicates with the sympathetic trunk and vagus and facial nerves. Its inferior ganglion is connected with the superior cervical sympathetic ganglion. Two filaments from the inferior ganglion pass to the vagus, one to its auricular branch and the other to its superior ganglion. A branch to the facial nerve arises from the glossopharyngeal nerve below the inferior ganglion and perforates the posterior belly of digastric to join the facial nerve near the stylomastoid foramen.</div></section><section><a id="s0525"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0395">Tympanic nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p0570">The tympanic nerve leaves the inferior ganglion, ascends to the tympanic cavity through the tympanic canaliculus and divides into branches that contribute to the tympanic plexus on the promontory. The lesser petrosal nerve is derived from the tympanic plexus.</div></section><section><a id="s0530"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0400">Carotid branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p0575">The carotid branch is often double. It arises just below the jugular foramen and descends on the internal carotid artery to the wall of the carotid sinus and to the carotid body. The nerve contains primary afferent fibres from chemoreceptors in the carotid body and from the baroreceptors lying in the carotid sinus wall. It may communicate with the inferior ganglion of the vagus, or with one of its branches, and with a sympathetic branch from the superior cervical ganglion (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0105">Fig. 35.20</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0535"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0405">Pharyngeal branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p0580">The pharyngeal branches are three or four filaments that unite with the pharyngeal branch of the vagus and the laryngopharyngeal branches of the sympathetic trunk to form the pharyngeal plexus near the middle pharyngeal constrictor. They constitute the route by which the glossopharyngeal nerve supplies sensory fibres to the mucosa of the pharynx.</div></section><section><a id="s0540"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0410">Muscular branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p0585">The muscular branch supplies stylopharyngeus.</div></section><section><a id="s0545"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0415">Tonsillar, lingual and lesser petrosal branches and the tympanic plexus</p><div class="textfl" id="p0590">The tympanic plexus supplies branches to the mucosa of the tympanic cavity, pharyngotympanic tube and mastoid air cells. The nerves that constitute the tympanic plexus ramify on the surface of the promontory on the medial wall of the tympanic cavity. They are derived from the tympanic branch of the glossopharyngeal nerve and the caroticotympanic nerves. The former arises from the inferior ganglion of the glossopharyngeal nerve and reaches the tympanic cavity via the tympanic canaliculus for the tympanic nerve. The superior and inferior caroticotympanic nerves are postganglionic sympathetic fibres derived from the carotid sympathetic plexus that traverse the wall of the carotid canal to join the plexus.</div><div class="text" id="p0595">The lesser petrosal nerve, which may be regarded as the continuation of the tympanic branch of the glossopharyngeal nerve, traverses the tympanic plexus. It occupies a small canal below that for tensor tympani. It runs past, and receives a connecting branch from, the geniculate ganglion of the facial nerve. The lesser petrosal nerve emerges from the anterior surface of the temporal bone via a small opening lateral to the hiatus for the greater petrosal nerve and then traverses either the foramen ovale or the sphenopetrosal fissure or the innominate canal (of Arnold) to join the otic ganglion. Postganglionic secretomotor fibres leave this ganglion in the auriculotemporal nerve to supply the parotid gland. The tympanic plexus sends a branch to the greater petrosal nerve via an opening anterior to the fenestra vestibuli.</div><div class="text" id="p0600">The tonsillar region is innervated by tonsillar branches of the maxillary and glossopharyngeal nerves. The fibres from the maxillary nerve pass through, but do not synapse in, the pterygopalatine ganglion; they are distributed through the lesser palatine nerves and form a plexus (the circulus tonsillaris) around the tonsil together with the tonsillar branches of the glossopharyngeal nerve. Nerve fibres from this plexus are also distributed to the soft palate and the region of the oropharyngeal isthmus. The tympanic branch of the glossopharyngeal nerve supplies the mucous membrane lining the tympanic cavity. Infection, malignancy and postoperative inflammation of the tonsil and tonsillar fossa may therefore be accompanied by pain referred to the ear.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s6550"/><section><a id="s0550"/><h4 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0420">Lesions of the glossopharyngeal nerve</h4><div class="textfl" id="p0605">There are anastomoses between the glossopharyngeal, vagus, greater auricular and other branches of the cervical plexus that may be significant when treating patients with skull base pathology. Damage to the glossopharyngeal nerve is rarely seen without associated involvement of other lower cranial nerves. Transient or sustained hypertension may follow surgical section of the nerve and indicates involvement of the carotid branch. Isolated lesions of the glossopharyngeal nerve lead to loss of sensation over the ipsilateral soft palate, fauces, pharynx and posterior third of the tongue, although this is difficult to assess clinically, and confirmation requires galvanic stimulation. The palatal and pharyngeal (gag) reflexes are reduced or absent and salivary secretion from the parotid gland may also be reduced. Weakness of stylopharyngeus cannot be tested individually. Glossopharyngeal neuralgia consists of episodic brief but severe pain, often precipitated by swallowing and experienced in the throat, behind the angle of the jaw and within the ear. Superior jugular bulb thromboses (e.g. in otitis media) and jugular foramen syndrome (associated with nasopharyngeal carcinoma or a jugular paraganglioma) may cause lesions of the adjacent glossopharyngeal, vagus and accessory nerves, with associated weakness in the muscles supplied in the pharynx and larynx.</div></section></section></section></section></section>


<section><a id="s0555"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle0425">Vagus nerve</h2><div class="textfl" id="p0610">The vagus is the tenth cranial nerve. It is a large mixed nerve, containing branchiomotor nerve fibres, general visceral afferents and preganglionic parasympathetic fibres. The vagus has a more extensive course and distribution than any other cranial nerve, running through the neck, thorax and abdomen. The proportion of efferent parasympathetic nerve fibres it contains varies at different levels but is small relative to its sensory and sensorimotor content. The branchiomotor fibres arise from neurones in the nucleus ambiguus in the medulla oblongata and are distributed to the constrictor muscles of the pharynx and the intrinsic muscles of the larynx. The preganglionic parasympathetic nerves arise from cell bodies in the vagal dorsal nucleus in the medulla oblongata, travel in the nerve and in its pulmonary, cardiac, oesophageal, gastric and intestinal branches and relay/synapse in minute ganglia in the visceral walls (see <a href="../B9780702077050000562/B9780702077050000562.xhtml#f0030">Fig. 56.6</a>) (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib79" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_79">Mussa and Verberne 2013</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0615">The general visceral afferent fibres carry sensation from thoracic and abdominal viscera and from aortic arch baroreceptors and chemoreceptors and end in the nucleus solitarius of the medulla. Their cell bodies are in the superior and inferior vagal ganglia. Their peripheral processes are distributed to terminals in the pharyngeal and oesophageal walls where, acting synergistically with glossopharyngeal visceral afferents in the pharynx, they are concerned with swallowing reflexes. Vagal afferents are also believed to innervate the thyroid and parathyroid glands. In the heart, vagal afferents innervate the walls of the great vessels, the aortic bodies and pressor receptors, where they are stimulated by raised intravascular pressure. In the lungs they are distributed via the pulmonary plexuses: they supply bronchial mucosa, where they are probably involved in cough reflexes; bronchial muscle, where they encircle myocytes and end in tendrils, which are sometimes regarded as muscle spindles and which are believed to be stimulated by change in the length of myocytes; interalveolar connective tissue, where their knob-like endings, together with terminals on myocytes, may evoke Hering–Breuer reflexes; the adventitia of pulmonary arteries, where they may be pressor receptors; and the intima of pulmonary veins, where they may be chemoreceptors. Vagal visceral afferent fibres also end in the gastric and intestinal walls, digestive glands and the kidneys. Fibres ending in the gut and its ducts respond to stretch or contraction. Gastric impulses may evoke sensations of hunger and nausea.<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E24" id="pagebreak_1.464E24"/><a id="pg1464.e22"/></div><div class="text" id="p0620">About 5% of the vagal afferents project directly to, and terminate in, the upper cervical spinal cord (C1–C2), where they are believed to contribute to referred sensations, as well as to propriospinal mechanisms of nociceptive modulation. Almost all the central processes of vagal and glossopharyngeal afferent fibres end in the nucleus solitarius of the medulla.</div><section><a id="s7560"/><section><a id="s0560"/><h3 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0430">Dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus</h3><div class="textfl" id="p0625">The dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus lies slightly dorsolateral to the hypoglossal nucleus, from which it is separated by the nucleus intercalatus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000288/B9780702077050000288.xhtml#f0045">Fig. 28.8</a>). The vagal nucleus extends caudally to the first cervical spinal segment and rostrally to the open portion of the medulla subjacent to the vagal trigone of the fourth ventricle. It is a general visceral efferent nucleus and is the largest parasympathetic nucleus in the brainstem. Most (80%) of its neurones give rise to the preganglionic parasympathetic fibres that pass into the vagus nerve. The remainder are interneurones or neurones that project centrally. The nucleus innervates the cardiac and smooth muscle of the thoracic viscera (heart, bronchi, lungs, oesophagus) and abdomen (stomach, liver, pancreas, spleen, small intestine and proximal part of the colon), and glandular epithelium. Sparse sensory afferents from the nodose ganglion project directly to the dorsal and lateral edges of the dorsal vagal nucleus, and possibly beyond it into the nucleus of the solitary tract (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib45" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_45">Holstein 2012</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0630">Neurones within the nucleus are heterogeneous and can be classified into nine subnuclei, grouped into rostral, intermediate and caudal divisions. Topographic maps of visceral representation in animals suggest that the heart and lungs are represented in the caudal and lateral parts of the nucleus; the stomach and pancreas in intermediate regions; and the remaining abdominal organs in the rostral and medial parts of the nucleus.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0565"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle0435">Extracranial course</h3><div class="textfl" id="p0635">The vagus nerve exits the skull through the jugular foramen, accompanied by the accessory nerve, with which it shares an arachnoid and a dural sheath. Both nerves lie anterior to a fibrous septum that separates them from the glossopharyngeal nerve. The vagus descends vertically in the neck in the carotid sheath, between the internal jugular vein and the internal carotid artery, to the upper border of the thyroid cartilage, and then passes between the vein and the common carotid artery to the root of the neck. Its relationships in this part of its course are therefore similar to those described for these structures (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0040">Figs 35.7A</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0045">35.8</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0090">35.17</a>). Its further course differs on the two sides. The right vagus descends posterior to the internal jugular vein to cross the first part of the subclavian artery and enter the thorax. The left vagus enters the thorax between the left common carotid and subclavian arteries, and behind the left brachiocephalic vein.</div><div class="text" id="p0640">After emerging from the jugular foramen, the vagus bears two marked enlargements: a small, round, superior (jugular) ganglion and a larger inferior (nodose) ganglion.</div><section><a id="s10570"/><section><a id="s0570"/><section><a id="s0575"/><h4 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0440">Superior (jugular) ganglion</h4><div class="textfl" id="p0645">The superior ganglion is greyish, spherical and approximately 4<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm in diameter. It is connected to the inferior glossopharyngeal ganglion and the sympathetic trunk, the latter by a filament from the superior cervical ganglion.</div></section><section><a id="s0580"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0445">Inferior (nodose) ganglion</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0650">The inferior or nodose ganglion is larger than the superior ganglion, and is elongated and cylindrical in shape with a length of 25<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm and a maximum breadth of 5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm. It is connected with the hypoglossal nerve, the loop between the first and second cervical spinal nerves, and with the superior cervical sympathetic ganglion. Most visceral afferent axons travelling in the vagus nerve are the peripheral processes of cell bodies located in the nodose ganglion.</div><div class="text" id="p0655">Both vagal ganglia are exclusively sensory and contain somatic, special visceral and general visceral afferent neurones. The superior ganglion is mainly somatic and most of its neurones enter the auricular nerve, whilst neurones in the inferior ganglion are concerned with visceral sensation from the heart, larynx, lungs and the alimentary tract from the pharynx to the transverse colon. Some fibres transmit impulses from taste endings in the vallecula and epiglottis. Large afferent fibres are derived from muscle spindles in the laryngeal muscles. Vagal sensory neurones in the nodose ganglion may show some somatotopic organization. Both ganglia are traversed by parasympathetic and perhaps some sympathetic fibres, but there is no evidence that vagal parasympathetic components relay in the inferior ganglion. Preganglionic motor fibres from the dorsal vagal nucleus and the special visceral efferents from the nucleus ambiguus, which descend to the inferior vagal ganglion, commonly form a visible band that skirts the ganglion in some mammals. These larger fibres probably provide motor innervation to the larynx in the recurrent laryngeal nerve, together with some contribution to the superior laryngeal nerve supplying cricothyroid.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s0585"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0450">Vagus nerve in the neck</h4><div class="textfl" id="p0660">The branches of the vagus in the neck are the meningeal, auricular, pharyngeal, carotid body, superior and recurrent laryngeal nerves and cardiac branches.</div><section><a id="s0590"/><section><a id="s0595"/><section><a id="s0600"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0455">Meningeal branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p0665">Meningeal branches appear to start from the superior vagal ganglion and pass through the jugular foramen to be distributed to the dura mater in the posterior cranial fossa (see <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0015">Fig. 25.3B</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0605"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0460">Auricular branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p0670">The auricular branch (Arnold’s nerve) arises from the superior vagal ganglion and is joined by a branch from the inferior ganglion of the glossopharyngeal nerve. It passes behind the internal jugular vein and enters the mastoid canaliculus on the lateral wall of the jugular fossa. Traversing the temporal bone, it crosses the facial canal approximately 4<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm above the stylomastoid foramen and here supplies an ascending branch to the facial nerve. Fibres of the nervus intermedius may pass to the auricular branch at this point, which may explain the cutaneous vesiculation in the auricle that sometimes accompanies geniculate herpes. The auricular branch then traverses the tympanomastoid fissure and divides into two rami. One ramus joins the posterior auricular nerve and the other is distributed to the skin of part of the ear and to the external acoustic meatus.</div></section><section><a id="s0610"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0465">Pharyngeal branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p0675">The pharyngeal branch of the vagus is the main motor nerve of the pharynx and consists of axons arising from neuronal cell bodies in the nucleus ambiguus. It supplies all the muscles of the soft palate (excluding tensor veli palatini, which is supplied by the mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve via the nerve to medial pterygoid) and all the muscles of the pharynx (excluding stylopharyngeus, which is supplied by the glossopharyngeal nerve). It emerges from the upper part of the inferior vagal ganglion, passes between the external and internal carotid arteries to reach the upper border of the middle pharyngeal constrictor, and divides into numerous filaments that join rami of the sympathetic trunk and glossopharyngeal nerve to form the pharyngeal plexus. It also gives off a minute filament, the ramus lingualis vagi, which joins the hypoglossal nerve as it curves round the occipital artery.</div></section><section><a id="s0615"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0470">Branches to the carotid body</p><div class="textfl" id="p0680">Branches to the carotid body are variable in number. They may arise from the inferior ganglion or travel in the pharyngeal branch, or in the superior laryngeal nerve. They form a plexus with the glossopharyngeal rami and branches of the cervical sympathetic trunk.</div></section><section><a id="s0620"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0475">Superior laryngeal nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p0685">The superior laryngeal nerve is larger than the pharyngeal branch and issues from the middle of the inferior vagal ganglion. It receives one or more communicating branches from the superior cervical sympathetic ganglion; most frequently, the connection is with the external laryngeal nerve. The sympathetic communication contributes to the innervation of the carotid body (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib74" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_74">Monfared et al 2002</a>) and the thyroid gland (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib117" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_117">Sun and Chang 1991</a>). The superior laryngeal nerve descends alongside the pharynx, at first posterior, then medial, to the internal carotid artery: it may be found on the lateral side of the artery. It divides into a smaller, external, and a larger, internal, branch, approximately 1.5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm below the ganglion: rarely, both branches may arise from the ganglion (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0045">Figs 35.8</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000410/B9780702077050000410.xhtml#f0065">41.12</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0625"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0480">Internal laryngeal nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p0690">The internal laryngeal nerve passes forwards approximately 7<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm before piercing the thyrohyoid membrane, usually at a higher level than the superior thyroid artery (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib30" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_30">Durham and Harrison 1962</a>). It splits into superior, middle and inferior branches on entering the larynx. The superior branch supplies the mucosa of the piriform fossa. The large middle branch is distributed to the mucosa of the ventricle, specifically the quadrangular membrane, and therefore probably conveys the afferent component of the cough reflex. The inferior ramus is mainly distributed to the mucosa of the ventricle and subglottic cavity. On the medial wall of the piriform fossa, descending branches give twigs to the <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E25" id="pagebreak_1.464E25"/><a id="pg1464.e23"/>interarytenoid muscle and share a number of communicating branches with the recurrent laryngeal nerve (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib105" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_105">Sanders and Mu 1998</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0695">The internal laryngeal nerve is sensory to the laryngeal mucosa down to the level of the vocal folds. It also carries afferent fibres from the laryngeal neuromuscular spindles and other stretch receptors. It descends to the thyrohyoid membrane, pierces it above the superior laryngeal artery and divides into an upper and lower branch. The upper branch is horizontal and supplies the mucosa of the pharynx, the epiglottis, vallecula and laryngeal vestibule. The lower branch descends in the medial wall of the piriform recess, supplies the aryepiglottic fold, the mucosa on the back of the arytenoid cartilage and one or two branches to transverse arytenoid (the latter unite with twigs from the recurrent laryngeal to supply the same muscle). The internal laryngeal nerve ends by piercing the inferior pharyngeal constrictor to unite with an ascending branch from the recurrent laryngeal nerve. As it ascends in the neck, it supplies branches, more numerous on the left, to the mucosa and tunica muscularis of the oesophagus and trachea, and to the inferior constrictor.</div></section><section><a id="s0630"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0485">External laryngeal nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p0700">The external laryngeal nerve, smaller than the internal, descends behind sternohyoid with the superior thyroid artery, but on a deeper plane. It lies first on (occasionally within) the inferior pharyngeal constrictor, to which it contributes some small branches, and then pierces it to curve round the inferior thyroid tubercle. It passes beneath the attachment of sternothyroid to the oblique line of the thyroid cartilage to reach cricothyroid, which it supplies. A communicating nerve continues from the posterior surface of cricothyroid, crosses the piriform fossa and enters thyroarytenoid, where it anastomoses with branches from the recurrent laryngeal nerve. It has been suggested that these communicating branches may provide both additional motor components to thyroarytenoid and sensory fibres to the mucosa in the region of the subglottis. An anastomosis between the external and internal laryngeal nerves has also been described (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib54" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_54">Kochilas et al 2008</a>). The external laryngeal nerve also gives branches to the pharyngeal plexus and communicates with the superior cardiac nerve and superior cervical sympathetic ganglion.</div><div class="text" id="p0705">The close relationship of the external laryngeal nerve to the superior thyroid artery puts the nerve at potential risk when the artery is clamped during thyroid lobectomy, particularly when it is close to the artery (in approximately 20% of cases), or where, instead of crossing the superior thyroid vessels approximately 1<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm or more above the superior pole of the gland, it actually passes below this point (in some 20% of cases) (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib22" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_22">Cernea et al 1992</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib50" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_50">Kierner et al 1998</a>). The external laryngeal nerve is also at risk in parathyroidectomy, carotid endarterectomy and anterior cervical spine procedures.</div></section><section><a id="s0635"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0490">Recurrent laryngeal nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p0710">The recurrent laryngeal nerve supplies all the laryngeal muscles except cricothyroid, communicates with the internal laryngeal nerve and carries sensory filaments from the laryngeal mucosa below the vocal folds and from laryngeal stretch receptors. The nerve differs in origin and course on the two sides. On the right, it almost always arises from the vagus anterior to the first part of the subclavian artery, and curves backwards below and then behind it to ascend obliquely to the side of the trachea behind the common carotid artery. Near the lower pole of the lateral lobe of the thyroid gland, it is closely related to the inferior thyroid artery and crosses either in front of, behind or between its branches. On the left, the recurrent laryngeal nerve arises from the vagus on the left of the aortic arch, curves below it immediately behind the attachment of the ligamentum arteriosum to the concavity of the aortic arch and ascends to the side of the trachea (see <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0110">Fig. 57.61</a>). As the recurrent laryngeal nerve curves round either the subclavian artery or the aortic arch, it gives cardiac filaments to the deep cardiac plexus.</div><div class="text" id="p0715">On both sides, the recurrent laryngeal nerve ascends in or near the tracheo-oesophageal groove. It is closely related to the medial surface of the thyroid gland before it passes under the lower border of the inferior constrictor, and it enters the larynx behind the articulation of the inferior thyroid cornu with the cricoid cartilage, passing either deep to (usually) or between (sometimes) the fibres of cricopharyngeus at its attachment to the lateral aspect of the cricoid cartilage. The nerve supplies cricopharyngeus as it passes. At this point, the nerve is in intimate proximity to the posteromedial aspect of the thyroid gland. The main trunk divides into two or more branches, usually below the lower border of the inferior constrictor, although branching may take place higher up. The anterior branch is mainly motor and is sometimes called the inferior laryngeal nerve (a term that is best avoided to prevent any confusion with a former synonym for the recurrent laryngeal nerve). It ascends posterior to the cricothyroid joint and its ligament, usually covered by fibres of posterior cricoarytenoid, then bends over the joint and continues forwards over lateral cricoarytenoid before terminating within thyroarytenoid. It innervates posterior cricoarytenoid by one or more branches, and interarytenoid, lateral cricoarytenoid and thyroarytenoid (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib010" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_010">Maranillo et al 2005</a>). The posterior branch of the recurrent laryngeal nerve is mainly sensory and ascends deep to posterior cricoarytenoid to join the descending branch of the internal laryngeal nerve.</div><div class="text" id="p0720">The recurrent laryngeal nerve does not always lie in a protected position in the tracheo-oesophageal groove but may be slightly anterior to it (more often on the right), and it may be markedly lateral to the trachea at the level of the lower part of the thyroid gland. The upper part of the nerve has a close but variable relationship to the inferior thyroid artery. On the right, it is as often anterior to, or posterior to, or intermingled with, the terminal branches of the artery; on the left, the nerve is usually posterior to the artery, though occasionally lies anterior to it. The stated incidences of these relationships vary between different authors. The recurrent laryngeal nerve has a highly variable branching pattern (see <a href="../B9780702077050000410/B9780702077050000410.xhtml#f0070">Fig. 41.13</a>) (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib02" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_02">Henry et al 2016</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0725">A very rare anomaly of relevance to laryngeal pathology and surgery is the ‘non-recurrent’ laryngeal nerve, where the right recurrent laryngeal nerve arises directly from the vagus nerve trunk high up in the neck and enters the larynx close to the inferior pole of the thyroid gland. Only the right side is affected, and it is always associated with an abnormal origin of the right subclavian artery from the aortic arch on the left side. If unrecognized, a non-recurrent laryngeal nerve may be susceptible to injury during surgery. It may also potentially be compressed by small tumours of the thyroid gland (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib36" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_36">Friedman et al 1986</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0640"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0495">Pharyngeal plexus</p><div class="textfl" id="p0730">Almost all of the nerve supply to the pharynx, whether motor or sensory, is derived from the pharyngeal plexus, which is formed by the pharyngeal branches of the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves with contributions from the superior cervical sympathetic ganglion. The plexus lies on the external surface of the pharynx, especially on the middle constrictor. Filaments from the plexus ascend or descend external to the superior and inferior constrictors before branching within the muscular layer and mucosa of the pharynx. Whether a ‘cranial root’ of the accessory nerve serves as the conduit for the major motor drive to the pharyngeal plexus, albeit via the vagus nerve, is a matter of debate. The plexiform connections that may be demonstrated between the accessory nerve and the vagus nerve within the posterior cranial fossa are too variable and insubstantial to support this function.</div></section><section><a id="s0645"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0500">Laryngeal nerve anastomoses</p><div class="textfl" id="p0735">Anastomotic communications between the internal, external and recurrent laryngeal nerves probably explain why normal or near normal voice function can be present following neck surgery when one or more branches of these nerves have been divided (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib81" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_81">Naidu et al 2014</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib106" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_106">Sanudo et al 1999</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib3a" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_3a">Henry et al 2017</a>). Numerous communications have been described (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib106" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Sanudo et al 1999</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib37" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_37">Furlan et al 2002</a>). The ansa Galeni, lying on the interarytenoid muscles, forms a direct connection between the recurrent and internal laryngeal nerves: it may be a single or double trunk or a plexus. The cricoid communication connects branches that originate bilaterally from the recurrent laryngeal nerve with the superior branch of the deep portion of the arytenoid plexus. The thyroarytenoid communication links the ascending branch of the recurrent laryngeal nerve and the descending branch from the anterior branch of the internal laryngeal nerve. There are also communications between the external laryngeal and recurrent laryngeal nerves, the internal and external laryngeal nerves and the recurrent laryngeal and superior laryngeal nerves. The anastomosis between the recurrent laryngeal nerve and the sympathetic trunk probably explains why ptosis is a rare complication following thyroidectomy.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0650"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0505">Lesions of the vagus nerve and recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0740">The consequences of vagal nerve lesions are complex, reflecting the long course of the nerve and the possible involvement of three of its branches, namely the pharyngeal, superior laryngeal and recurrent laryngeal nerves. Collectively these nerves innervate the muscles of the larynx, soft palate and pharynx, and injury may therefore have deleterious effects on phonation and/or soft palate movements and/or swallowing. A lesion of the vagus nerve above the level at which the pharyngeal branch is given off will affect both the superior and recurrent laryngeal nerves. This causes immobility of the vocal fold on the affected side and imparts a breathy voice with lack of pitch and limited loudness. The affected fold is paralysed and lies in the so-called ‘cadaveric’ position halfway between abduction and adduction. If the lesion is unilateral, the voice is weak and hoarse, but if it is bilateral, phonation is almost absent, the vocal pitch cannot be altered, and the cough is weak and ineffective. There will also be a degree of hypernasality because of the <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E26" id="pagebreak_1.464E26"/><a id="pg1464.e24"/>effects on movements of the soft palate caused by paralysis of levator veli palatini. Unilateral palsies impact very significantly on the quality of life of the patient because of impaired vocalization and a tendency to aspirate. Bilateral palsies are extremely serious and a tracheostomy may be required to protect the airway.</div><div class="text" id="p0745">A lesion affecting the superior laryngeal nerve may be unilateral or bilateral. Complete section is most likely during the ligation of the vessels forming the vascular pedicle of the superior pole of the thyroid gland during thyroid lobectomy. Unilateral lesions may result in the vocal folds appearing relatively normal and the effect on voice is barely noticeable and is often overlooked. A more detailed examination may detect some shortening of the vocal folds on the affected side with asymmetric tilt of the epiglottis and the anterior larynx canted towards the unaffected side. The result is a mildly hoarse voice with loss of pitch control. Bilateral superior laryngeal nerve lesions result in shortening of both vocal folds, the overhanging of the epiglottis over the folds and reduced tilt between the thyroid and cricoid cartilage. Effects on the voice are correspondingly greater, with reduced loudness and pitch but variable breathiness.</div><div class="text" id="p0750">Damage to the internal laryngeal nerve causes loss of mechanoreceptive and proprioceptive sensation from the larynx. Unilateral loss produces a feeling that something is stuck in the throat, whereas bilateral loss will result in aspiration and can cause dysphagia, with a risk of choking.</div><div class="text" id="p0755">Unilateral complete palsy of the recurrent laryngeal nerve is more common on the left side, presumably because the nerve is longer on this side. There is isolated paralysis of all the laryngeal muscles on the affected side except cricothyroid, which is innervated by the external laryngeal nerve. The patient may be asymptomatic or have a hoarse, breathy voice and there will be diminished ability to manipulate pitch. The hoarseness may be permanent or may become less severe with time as the contralateral fold develops the ability to hyperadduct and oppose the paralysed fold, thereby closing the glottis during phonation and coughing, although this is seldom enough to restore full voice quality. There may be aspiration of food and drink. Bilateral lesions of the recurrent laryngeal nerve result in both vocal folds being paralysed and taking up a paramedian position. Phonation can be nearly normal because the vocal folds lie so close to the midline, but there will be audible stridor and a compromised airway.</div><div class="text" id="p0760">Clinically the position of the vocal fold in the acute phase after section of the recurrent laryngeal nerve is very variable. Though stridor is more common after bilateral lesions and sometimes only audible to the educated ear, the folds may be sufficiently abducted so that there is little problem with airway obstruction at rest, although the voice is always weaker in this situation. The folds are slightly more widely separated in chronic lesions, which renders the voice weaker but with a less precarious airway. Atrophy and fibrosis of paraglottic muscles probably affect the position of paralysed vocal folds in chronic lesions to a greater degree than variations in the strength of the apposing adductor and abductor muscle groups.</div><div class="text" id="p0765">For many years, conventional wisdom held that movements of abduction were affected to a greater degree than those of adduction when the recurrent laryngeal nerve was partially damaged (Semon’s law). This effect was thought to reflect the internal segregation within the recurrent laryngeal nerve of axons supplying the laryngeal abductor muscles. The hypothesis was later undermined by the demonstration that axons destined for particular laryngeal muscles are randomly distributed within the nerve. The weak abductive action of cricothyroid that is said to produce lengthening of the vocal folds has been suggested as the explanation for the relative sparing of abduction in these lesions, but is difficult to reconcile with the alternative view that cricothyroid may be a slight adductor of the vocal folds (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib05" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_05">Mu and Sanders 2009</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib131" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_131">Wadie et al 2013</a>). It is likely that predicting the effect of partial lesions of the recurrent laryngeal nerve is complicated by the variable patterns of anastomoses between the laryngeal nerves. For further reading, see <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib4" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_4">Aronson and Bless (2009)</a> and <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib13" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_13">Blitzer et al (2009)</a>.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s0655"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0510">Vagus nerve in the thorax</h4><div class="textfl" id="p0770">Preganglionic parasympathetic axons arise from neuronal cell bodies in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus in the medulla oblongata. Those destined for the thoracic viscera travel in the pulmonary, cardiac and oesophageal branches of the vagus nerve and synapse in minute ganglia in the walls of the target viscera. Axons travelling in cardiac branches join the cardiac plexuses and synapse in ganglia distributed freely over both atria, the interatrial septum and peri-nodal subepicardial tissue. Postganglionic fibres are distributed to the atria and the atrioventricular bundle and are concentrated around the sinuatrial and, to a lesser extent, the atrioventricular nodes. Cardiac branches slow the heart rate and diminish the force of contraction and may indirectly influence ventricular muscle via their effect on the atrioventricular node. The direct postganglionic parasympathetic innervation of the ventricles is sparse. The smaller branches of the coronary arteries are innervated mainly by parasympathetic vagal neurones, whereas the larger arteries are innervated mainly by sympathetic neurones. All cardiac branches of the vagus nerves contain both afferent and efferent fibres. Pulmonary branches contain axons that synapse in ganglia of the pulmonary plexuses: they are motor (bronchoconstrictor) to the circular non-striated muscle fibres of the bronchi and bronchioles (and therefore bring about bronchoconstriction), and secretomotor to the mucous glands of the respiratory epithelium.</div><section><a id="s0660"/><section><a id="s0665"/><section><a id="s0670"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0515">Right vagus nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p0775">The right vagus nerve descends posterior to the right internal jugular vein in the neck and crosses the first part of the right subclavian artery to enter the thorax; the ansa subclavia is lateral, and the phrenic nerve is further lateral. After giving off the right recurrent laryngeal nerve, it descends through the superior mediastinum, at first posterior to the right brachiocephalic vein, and then lateral to the trachea and posteromedial to the superior vena cava. Superiorly, the right mediastinal part of the parietal pleura and superior lobe of the lung are lateral; inferiorly, the azygos vein and its arching terminal portion separate the right vagus nerve from the parietal pleura (see <a href="../B9780702077050000562/B9780702077050000562.xhtml#f0035">Fig. 56.7A</a>). The nerve next passes posterior to the right main bronchus and lies on the posterior aspect of the right lung hilum. Here, it gives off posterior bronchial branches that unite with rami from the second to fifth/sixth thoracic sympathetic ganglia to form the right posterior pulmonary plexus. Two or three branches descend from the inferior part of this plexus on the posterior aspect of the oesophagus to join a left vagal branch and form the posterior oesophageal plexus. The anterior vagal trunk, containing nerve fibres from both vagus nerves, leaves the plexus and passes inferiorly on the posterior surface of the oesophagus, entering the abdomen by passing through the oesophageal hiatus in the respiratory diaphragm.</div></section><section><a id="s0675"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0520">Left vagus nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p0780">The left vagus nerve enters the thorax posterior to the left brachiocephalic vein, between the left common carotid artery (anterior) and left subclavian artery (posterior). It descends through the superior mediastinum, crosses the left side of the aortic arch, gives off the left recurrent laryngeal nerve and then passes posterior to the left lung hilum (see <a href="../B9780702077050000562/B9780702077050000562.xhtml#f0035">Fig. 56.7B</a>). Superior to the aortic arch, it is crossed anterolaterally by the left phrenic nerve, and on the arch, it is crossed laterally by the left superior intercostal vein and sometimes by a continuation of the accessory hemiazygos vein. Posterior to the hilum of the left lung, the left vagus nerve gives off posterior bronchial branches that unite with rami of the second to fourth thoracic sympathetic ganglia to form the left posterior pulmonary plexus. Two or three branches descend anteriorly on the oesophagus and join with a ramus from the right posterior pulmonary plexus to form the anterior oesophageal plexus. The posterior vagal trunk, containing nerve fibres from both vagus nerves, passes inferiorly on the anterior surface of the oesophagus and enters the abdomen through the oesophageal hiatus. Numerous branches from the anterior vagal and left sympathetic trunks are distributed to the descending thoracic aorta. This pathway transmits the typical intense, excruciating pain of an intramural aortic haematoma from aortic dissection or laceration.</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s0680"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0525">Vagus nerve in the abdomen</h4><div class="textfl" id="p0785">The vagus nerves supply parasympathetic innervation to the abdominal viscera as far as the distal transverse colon, i.e. they supply the derivatives of the foregut and midgut, whereas the derivatives of the hindgut are supplied by parasympathetic fibres travelling via the pelvic splanchnic nerves; the overlap between these two supplies is variable. The vagal trunks are derived from the oesophageal plexus and enter the abdomen via the oesophageal hiatus, closely related to the anterior and posterior walls of the abdominal part of the oesophagus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000562/B9780702077050000562.xhtml#f0030">Fig. 56.6</a>). The anterior vagal trunk is mostly derived from the left vagus and the posterior vagal trunk from the right vagus. The nerves supply the abdominal part of the oesophagus and stomach directly. The anterior vagal trunk gives off a hepatic branch, which innervates the liver and its vasculature, including the gallbladder and bile ducts, and the other structures in the free edge of the lesser omentum (hepatoduodenal ligament). The posterior vagal trunk supplies branches to the coeliac plexus: these fibres frequently constitute the largest portion of the fibres contributing to the plexus and arise directly from the posterior vagal trunk and from its gastric branch, and run beneath the peritoneum, deep to the posterior wall of the superior part of the omental bursa, to reach the coeliac plexus. Their synaptic relays with postganglionic neurones are situated in the myenteric (Auerbach’s) and submucosal (Meissner’s) plexuses in the wall of the hollow viscera.<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E27" id="pagebreak_1.464E27"/><a id="pg1464.e25"/></div></section></section></section>



<section><a id="s0685"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle0530">Accessory nerve</h2><div class="textfl" id="p0790">The accessory nerve is the eleventh cranial nerve: its integrity is fundamental to thoracoscapular function and essential for scapulohumeral rhythm (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib19" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_19">Camp and Birch 2011</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0795">Traditionally, it has been described as having a cranial root composed of a variable number of small rootlets that emerge from the post-olivary groove of the dorsolateral medulla, caudal to the rootlets of the vagus, and a spinal root composed of fibres derived from the cervical segments of the spinal cord (see below). According to this description, the cranial rootlets carry axons of motor neurones located in the caudal part of the nucleus ambiguus, and the spinal rootlets carry axons of motor neurones located in a nucleus in the ventral horn of the cervical spinal cord in line with the nucleus ambiguus. The spinal root ascends within the vertebral canal and enters the skull via the foramen magnum. The cranial and spinal roots join, either before or within the jugular foramen, and the bundle so formed then divides into internal and external branches on leaving the jugular foramen. The internal branch joins the vagus nerve and its fibres innervate branchiomeric muscles via the pharyngeal and laryngeal branches of the vagus nerve and the external branch descends to the neck and innervates sternocleidomastoid and trapezius.</div><div class="text" id="p0800">There is an alternative view that the cranial root of the accessory nerve is anatomically and functionally part of the vagus nerve, and that the spinal root is, <span class="italic">de facto</span>, the accessory nerve. The issue is not simply one of contentious anatomical terminology; rather, it reflects the need to clarify the relevant microsurgical anatomy in order to minimize potential complications during surgery in the region. Paradoxically, meticulous cadaveric dissection studies, often undertaken stereomicroscopically, have failed to reach a consensus, finding either no connections between rootlets arising from the dorsolateral medulla and the spinal root of the accessory nerve because the cranial root was absent, or significant variations in the arrangement and size of plexiform connections between the cranial rootlets and the spinal root. Plexiform interconnections between neighbouring cranial nerves are not uncommon and are certainly not confined to the accessory and vagus nerves (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib110" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_110">Shoja et al 2014</a>); their functional significance is often uncertain. (For further reading, see <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib57" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_57">Krammer et al (1987)</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib60" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_60">Lachman et al (2002)</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib104" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_104">Ryan et al (2007)</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib135" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_135">Wiles et al (2007)</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib10" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_10">Benninger and McNeil (2010)</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib113" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_113">Skinner (2011)</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib63" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_63">Liu et al (2014)</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib124" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_124">Tubbs et al (2014)</a>.)</div><section><a id="s0690"/><section><a id="s0695"/><h3 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0535">Spinal nucleus</h3><div class="textfl" id="p0805">The (spinal) accessory nerve arises from an elongated nucleus of motor neurones in the lateral aspect of the ventral horn. Some rootlets emerge directly, while others turn cranially before exiting; their line of exit is irregular rather than linear. They join to form a trunk, the accessory nerve, which ascends intradurally within the vertebral canal between the ligamentum denticulatum and the dorsal roots of the spinal nerves. The nerve enters the skull via the foramen magnum, behind the vertebral artery. It then turns upwards and passes laterally to reach the jugular foramen, which it traverses in a common dural sheath with the vagus, but separated from that nerve by a fold of arachnoid mater.</div></section></section></section>


<section><a id="s0715"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle0550">Hypoglossal Nerve</h2><div class="textfl" id="p0845">The hypoglossal nerve is the twelfth cranial nerve and is motor to all the muscles of the tongue except palatoglossus.</div><section><a id="s0725"/><section><a id="s0730"/><h3 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0555">Hypoglossal nucleus and central connections</h3><div class="textfl" id="p0850">The hypoglossal nucleus lies near the midline in the dorsal medullary grey matter. It is approximately 2<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm long and extends from the hypoglossal trigone in the floor of the fourth ventricle into the closed part of the medulla (see <a href="../B9780702077050000288/B9780702077050000288.xhtml#f0020">Figs 28.3</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000288/B9780702077050000288.xhtml#f0030">28.5</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000288/B9780702077050000288.xhtml#f0045">28.8</a>). It consists of large motor neurones interspersed with myelinated fibres and is organized into dorsal and ventral nuclear tiers, each divisible into medial and lateral subnuclei. A musculotopic organization of motor neurones within the nuclei corresponds to the structural and functional divisions of tongue musculature. Experimental evidence suggests that motor neurones of the medial division of the hypoglossal nucleus innervate tongue muscles that are orientated in planes transverse to the long axis of the tongue (transverse and vertical intrinsics and genioglossus), whereas motor neurones of the lateral division innervate tongue muscles that are orientated parallel to this axis (styloglossus, hyoglossus, superior and inferior longitudinal).</div><div class="text" id="p0855">The hypoglossal nucleus receives corticonuclear fibres from the precentral gyrus and adjacent areas, predominately from the contralateral hemisphere. The corticonuclear fibres synapse either directly on motor neurones of the nucleus or on interneurones. Most medial hypoglossal subnuclei receive projections from both cerebral hemispheres. The hypoglossal nucleus may connect with the cerebellum via the adjacent perihypoglossal nucleus, and perhaps also with the medullary reticular formation, the trigeminal sensory nucleus and the nucleus solitarius (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib45" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Holstein 2012</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0860">Hypoglossal fibres emerge from the ventral aspect of the nucleus and traverse the reticular formation lateral to both the medial lemniscus and the medial accessory olivary nucleus. They continue ventrally, between the medial accessory and the principal inferior olivary nuclei, and then curve laterally to emerge from the brainstem as a series of 10–15 rootlets arranged linearly along the preolivary sulcus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000288/B9780702077050000288.xhtml#f0045">Fig. 28.8</a>) (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib139" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_139">Yousry et al 2002</a>). These rootlets coalesce into two bundles that exit separately through the hypoglossal canal and unite extradurally.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0735"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle0560">Extracranial course</h3><div class="textfl" id="p0865">The hypoglossal rootlets run laterally behind the vertebral artery, collected into two bundles that perforate the dura mater separately opposite the hypoglossal canal in the occipital bone, and unite after traversing it. The canal is sometimes divided by a spicule of bone. The nerve emerges from the canal in a plane medial to the internal jugular vein, internal carotid artery and glossopharyngeal, vagus and accessory nerves, and passes inferolaterally behind the internal carotid artery and glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves to the interval between the artery and the internal jugular vein (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0045">Fig. 35.8</a>). Here, it makes a half-spiral turn round the inferior vagal ganglion, united to it by connective tissue. It then descends almost vertically between the vessels and anterior to the vagus to a point level with the angle of the mandible, becoming superficial below the posterior belly of digastric and emerging between the internal jugular vein and internal carotid artery. Often associated with a plexus of veins around the junction of the common facial and internal jugular veins (vena comitans nervi hypoglossi), excessive bleeding here during neck dissection can lead to nerve damage. The nerve loops round the inferior sternocleidomastoid branch of the occipital artery, crosses lateral to both internal and external carotid arteries and the loop of the lingual artery a little above the tip of the greater cornu of the hyoid, and is itself crossed by the facial vein (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0040">Figs 35.7A</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0045">35.8</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0090">35.17</a>). The nerve next inclines upwards and forwards on hyoglossus, passing deep to stylohyoid, the tendon of digastric and the posterior border of mylohyoid. Between mylohyoid and hyoglossus, the hypoglossal nerve lies below the deep part of the submandibular gland, the submandibular duct and the lingual nerve, with which it communicates. It then passes on to the lateral aspect of genioglossus, continuing forwards in its substance as far as the tip of the tongue (see <a href="../B9780702077050000379/B9780702077050000379.xhtml#f0055">Fig. 37.11A</a>). It distributes fibres to styloglossus, hyoglossus and genioglossus and to the intrinsic muscles of the tongue. Cadaveric tongues stained using Sihler’s stain (a whole mount nerve staining technique that renders a large specimen transparent while counterstaining all nerves) or acetylcholinesterase or silver stains, show the basic mammalian intralingual pattern of hypoglossal nerve distribution but with notable differences, even from non-human primates. Thus, many muscle fibres, particularly in the transverse group of intrinsic muscles, contain multiple <span class="italic">en grappe</span> motor end-plates (suggesting that they are some variant of slow tonic muscle fibres). Presumably, these specializations facilitate the fine motor control of tongue shape that is required in speech and swallowing (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib6a" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_6a">Mu and Sanders 2010</a>) (see <a href="../B9780702077050000379/B9780702077050000379.xhtml#f0185">Fig. 37.13</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0870">The hypoglossal nerve has meningeal, descending, thyrohyoid, geniohyoid and communicating branches.</div><section><a id="s0740"/><section><a id="s0745"/><section><a id="s0750"/><section><a id="s0755"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0565">Meningeal branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p0875">Meningeal branches leave the nerve in the hypoglossal canal and return through it to supply the diploë of the occipital bone, the dural walls of the occipital and inferior petrosal sinuses, and much of the floor of the anterior wall of the posterior cranial fossa, probably through pathways other than that of the hypoglossal nerve, e.g. upper cervical spinal nerves (see <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0015">Fig. 25.3B</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0760"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0570">Descending branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p0880">The descending branch (descendens hypoglossi) contains fibres from the first cervical spinal nerve. It leaves the hypoglossal nerve when it curves around the occipital artery, and runs down on the carotid sheath. It provides a branch to the superior belly of omohyoid before joining the descendens cervicalis to form the ansa cervicalis (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0040">Figs 35.7A</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0045">35.8</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0765"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0575">Nerves to thyrohyoid and geniohyoid</p><div class="textfl" id="p0885">The nerves to thyrohyoid and geniohyoid arise near the posterior border of hyoglossus and are derived from the first cervical ventral ramus.</div></section><section><a id="s0770"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0580">Communicating branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p0890">The hypoglossal nerve communicates with the sympathetic trunk, the lingual, glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves and the pharyngeal plexus. Near the atlas it is joined by branches from the superior cervical sympathetic ganglion and a filament from the loop between the first cervical ventral ramus and the ascending branch of the second cervical ventral ramus that leaves the hypoglossal nerve as the upper root of the ansa cervicalis. The vagal connections are close to the skull; numerous filaments pass between the hypoglossal nerve and the inferior vagal ganglion in the connective tissue that unites them. As the hypoglossal nerve curves round the occipital artery it receives the ramus lingualis vagi from the pharyngeal plexus. Near the anterior border of hyoglossus it is connected with the lingual nerve by many filaments that ascend on the muscle.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s8775"/><section><a id="s0775"/><h4 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0585">Lesions of the hypoglossal nerve</h4><div class="textfl" id="p0895">The hypoglossal nerve may be damaged during neck dissection. Complete hypoglossal division causes unilateral lingual paralysis and eventual hemiatrophy; the protruded tongue deviates to the paralysed side, and, on retraction, the wasted and paralysed side rises higher than the unaffected side. The larynx may deviate towards the active side in swallowing, as a consequence of the unilateral paralysis of the hyoid depressors associated with loss of the first cervical ventral ramus, which runs with the hypoglossal nerve. If paralysis is bilateral, the tongue is motionless. Taste and tactile sensibility are unaffected but articulation is slow and swallowing very difficult.</div><div class="text" id="p0900">The hypoglossal nerve is often used to reanimate the face in patients, particularly the elderly, when their facial nerves have been transected. Direct end-to-end, end-to-side or split-nerve grafts are reliable and offer a robust, effective and quick alternative to more complex reanimation procedures.</div></section></section></section></section></section>


<section><a id="s0780"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle0590">Spinal Nerves</h2><div class="textfl" id="p0905">Spinal nerves are the means by which the central nervous system receives information from, and controls the activities of, the trunk and limbs. There are 31 pairs of spinal nerves (8 cervical, 12 thoracic, 5 lumbar, 5 sacral, 1 coccygeal): they contain a mixture of sensory and motor fibres. The abbreviations C, T, L, S and Co, with appropriate numerals, are commonly applied to individual nerves as their ‘root value’.</div><div class="text" id="p0910">Spinal nerves pass through intervertebral foramina. At thoracic, lumbar, sacral and coccygeal levels, the numbered nerve exits the vertebral canal by passing below the pedicle of the corresponding vertebra, e.g. the fourth lumbar nerve (L4) nerve exits the intervertebral foramen between the fourth and fifth lumbar vertebrae. However, in the cervical region, the upper seven cervical nerves (C1–C7) pass above their corresponding vertebrae. The first cervical nerve (C1) exits the vertebral canal between the occipital bone and atlas, and is often termed the suboccipital nerve. The last pair of cervical nerves does not have a correspondingly numbered vertebra and the eighth cervical nerve passes between the seventh cervical and first thoracic vertebrae.<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E29" id="pagebreak_1.464E29"/><a id="pg1464.e27"/></div><section><a id="s0785"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle0595">Appearance and orientation of roots at each spinal level</h3><div class="textfl" id="p0915">The size and direction of spinal nerve roots vary. The upper four cervical roots are small, while the lower four are large. Cervical dorsal roots have a thickness ratio to the ventral roots of 3:1, which is greater than in other regions. The first dorsal root is an exception, because it is smaller than its ventral counterpart, and is occasionally absent. The first and second cervical spinal roots are short and run almost horizontally to their exits from the vertebral canal, whereas from the third to the eighth cervical levels the roots slope obliquely down. Obliquity and length increase successively, although the distance between spinal attachment and vertebral exit never exceeds the height of one vertebra. There is an alternative view that the upper cervical roots descend, the fifth is horizontal, the sixth to eighth ascend, the first two thoracic roots are horizontal, the next three ascend, the sixth is horizontal and the rest descend (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib59" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_59">Kubik and Müntener 1969</a>): this view is based on the observation that the cervicothoracic part of the spinal cord grows more in length than other parts.</div><div class="text" id="p0920">Thoracic roots, except the first, are small, and the dorsal root only slightly exceeds the ventral in thickness. They increase successively in length. In the lower thoracic region, the roots descend in contact with the spinal cord for at least two vertebrae before emerging from the vertebral canal.</div><div class="text" id="p0925">Lower lumbar and upper sacral roots are the largest, and their rootlets are the most numerous. Coccygeal roots are the smallest. Lumbar, sacral and coccygeal roots descend with increasing obliquity to their exits (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib59" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Kubik and Müntener 1969</a>). The spinal cord ends near the lower border of the first lumbar vertebra, which means that the lengths of successive roots rapidly increase: the consequent collection of roots forms the cauda equina (see <a href="../B9780702077050000471/B9780702077050000471.xhtml#f0020">Fig. 47.1A</a>). The largest roots, and hence the largest spinal nerves, are continuous with the spinal cervical and lumbar enlargements and innervate the upper and lower limbs.</div><section><a id="s0790"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0600">Spinal ganglia (dorsal root ganglia)</h4><div class="textfl" id="p0930">Spinal ganglia (dorsal root ganglia, DRG) are large groups of sensory neurones on the dorsal spinal roots. Each is oval and reddish: its size is related to that of its root. A ganglion is bifid medially where the two fascicles of a dorsal root emerge to enter the spinal cord. Ganglia usually lie in the intervertebral foramina, immediately lateral to the perforation of the dura mater by the roots (see <a href="../B9780702077050000471/B9780702077050000471.xhtml#f0045">Fig. 47.6A</a>). However, the first cervical ganglion (when present) lies on the vertebral arch of the atlas and the second lies posterior to the lateral atlanto-axial joint; the sacral ganglia lie inside the vertebral canal; and the coccygeal ganglion usually lies within the dura mater. Small aberrant ganglia sometimes occur on the upper cervical dorsal roots between the spinal ganglia and the cord.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0795"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle0605">Spinal nerves proper</h3><div class="textfl" id="p0935">Immediately distal to the spinal ganglia, ventral and dorsal roots unite to form spinal nerves. These very soon divide into dorsal and ventral rami, both of which receive fibres from both roots (see <a href="../B9780702077050000471/B9780702077050000471.xhtml#f0045">Fig. 47.6A</a>). At all levels above the sacral, this division occurs within the intervertebral foramen. Division of the sacral spinal nerves occurs within the sacral vertebral canal, and the dorsal and ventral rami exit separately through posterior and anterior sacral foramina at each level. Spinal nerves trifurcate at some cervical and thoracic levels, in which case the third branch is called a ramus intermedius. At or distal to its origin, each ventral ramus gives off recurrent meningeal (sinuvertebral) branches and receives a grey ramus communicans from the corresponding sympathetic ganglion. All the thoracic and first and second lumbar ventral rami each contribute a white ramus communicans to the corresponding sympathetic ganglia. The second, third and fourth sacral nerves supply visceral branches that carry a preganglionic parasympathetic outflow direct to the pelvic plexuses.</div><div class="text" id="p0940">Cervical spinal nerves enlarge from the first to the sixth nerve. The seventh and eighth cervical and the first thoracic nerves are similar in size to the sixth cervical nerve. The remaining thoracic nerves are relatively small. Lumbar nerves are large, increasing in size from the first to the fifth. The first sacral nerve is larger than the other sacral nerves, which progressively decrease in size. The coccygeal nerves are the smallest spinal nerves.</div><div class="text" id="p0945">In the radicular (‘root’) canal and intervertebral foramen, a spinal nerve is related to the spinal artery of that level and its radicular branch, and to a small plexus of veins. At the outer end of the foramen, the nerve may lie above or below transforaminal ligaments. The size of a spinal nerve and associated structures within the intervertebral foramen is not in direct relation to the size of the foramen through which the nerve exits: the fifth lumbar nerve is the largest of the lumbar nerves but its foramen is smaller than those of the first four lumbar nerves, and so it is particularly liable to compression.</div><section><a id="s0800"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0610">Meningeal nerves</h4><div class="textfl" id="p0950">Recurrent meningeal (or sinuvertebral) nerves (see <a href="../B9780702077050000471/B9780702077050000471.xhtml#f0060">Fig. 47.9</a>) occur at all vertebral levels. They are mixed sensory and sympathetic nerves, represented by numerous fine filaments amongst which as many as four larger trunks may be evident. At cervical levels the autonomic roots arise from the grey rami that form the vertebral nerve. At thoracic and lumbar levels, each nerve is formed by a somatic root from the ventral ramus and by an autonomic root from the grey ramus communicans of that segment. Each nerve pursues a recurrent course through the intervertebral foramen, passing ventral to the spinal nerve, to enter the vertebral canal, where it divides into ascending, descending and transverse branches. These branches communicate with corresponding branches from the segments above and below, and from the contralateral side, forming arcades along the floor of the vertebral canal. Meningeal branches of the arcades form a plexus on the ventral surface of the dural sac and nerve root sleeves that attenuates laterally; the posterior paramedian dura is devoid of nerve endings. Skeletal branches are distributed to the posterior longitudinal ligament, the periosteum of the vertebral bodies, and to the posterior and posterolateral aspects of the intervertebral discs (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib39" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_39">Garcia-Cosamalon et al 2010</a>). Vascular branches accompany the veins and arteries of the vertebral canal and those of the vertebral bodies. The upper three cervical meningeal nerves ascend through the foramen magnum into the posterior cranial fossa, where they innervate the dura mater that covers the clivus; en route, they innervate the median atlanto-axial joint and its ligaments.</div></section><section><a id="s0805"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0615">Variations of spinal roots and nerves</h4><div class="textfl" id="p0955">The courses of spinal roots and nerves in relation to the thecal sac and vertebral and radicular canals may be aberrant. An individual intervertebral foramen may contain a duplicated sheath, nerve and roots, which will then be absent at an adjacent level. Abnormal communications between roots may occur within the vertebral canal. These anomalies have been described and classified for the lumbosacral spine by <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib83" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_83">Neidre and Macnab (1983)</a>.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0810"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle0620">Functional components of spinal nerves</h3><div class="textfl" id="p0960">A typical spinal nerve contains somatic efferent fibres and somatic and visceral afferent fibres. Some, but not all, spinal nerves also contain preganglionic autonomic fibres.</div><section><a id="s0815"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0625">Somatic components</h4><div class="textfl" id="p0965">Somatic efferent fibres innervate skeletal muscles and are axons of α, β and γ neurones in the spinal ventral grey column. Somatic afferent fibres are the peripheral processes of unipolar neurones in the spinal ganglia and convey impulses into the CNS from receptors in the skin, subcutaneous tissues, muscles, tendons, fasciae and joints.</div></section><section><a id="s0820"/><hgroup><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0630">Visceral components</h4><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0635">Visceral efferent fibres</h5></hgroup><section><a id="s0825"/><div class="textfl" id="p0970">Preganglionic visceral efferent sympathetic fibres are axons of neurones in the spinal intermediolateral grey column throughout the thoracic and upper two or three lumbar segments; they join the sympathetic trunk via corresponding white rami communicantes and synapse with postganglionic neurones that are distributed to smooth muscle, myocardium or exocrine glands.</div><div class="text" id="p0975">Preganglionic visceral efferent parasympathetic fibres are axons of neurones in the spinal lateral grey column of the second to fourth sacral segments; they leave the ventral rami of corresponding sacral nerves and synapse in pelvic ganglia. Postganglionic axons are distributed mainly to smooth muscle or glands in the walls of the pelvic viscera.</div></section><section><a id="s0830"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0640">Visceral afferent fibres</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0980">General visceral afferent fibres from the viscera and blood vessels accompany their efferent counterparts. They respond to various stimuli including excessive muscular contraction or distension, ischaemia and inflammation; their neuronal somata are located in the glossopharyngeal and vagal ganglia and in thoracic and lumbosacral dorsal root ganglia (visceral afferent fibres that run mainly with sympathetic efferent fibres). Their central projections reach the brainstem and spinal cord, respectively. Sensory fibres in the vagus are more numerous in <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E30" id="pagebreak_1.464E30"/><a id="pg1464.e28"/>the derivatives of the foregut than those of the derivatives of the midgut and are concerned with physiological responses such as satiety, whereas pain and discomfort are mediated by spinal pathways.</div><div class="text" id="p0985">The somata of glossopharyngeal general visceral afferents are in the glossopharyngeal ganglia. Their peripheral processes innervate the postsulcal lingual region, the palatine tonsils and pharynx, but they do not innervate taste buds. They also innervate the carotid sinus and the carotid body, which contain receptors sensitive to tension and changes in chemical composition of the blood. Impulses from these receptors are essential to circulatory and respiratory reflexes.</div><div class="text" id="p0990">The somata of vagal general visceral afferent fibres are in the superior and inferior vagal ganglia. Their peripheral processes are distributed to terminals in the pharyngeal and oesophageal walls where, acting synergistically with glossopharyngeal visceral afferents in the pharynx, they are concerned with swallowing reflexes. Vagal afferents are also believed to innervate the thyroid and parathyroid glands. In the heart, vagal afferents innervate the walls of the great vessels, the aortic bodies and pressor receptors, where they are stimulated by raised intravascular pressure. In the lungs they are distributed via the pulmonary plexuses. They supply bronchial mucosa, where they are probably involved in cough reflexes; bronchial muscle, where they encircle myocytes and end in tendrils, which are sometimes regarded as muscle spindles and which are believed to be stimulated by change in the length of myocytes; interalveolar connective tissue, where their knob-like endings, together with terminals on myocytes, may evoke Hering–Breuer reflexes; the adventitia of pulmonary arteries, where they may be pressor receptors; and the intima of pulmonary veins, where they may be chemoreceptors. Vagal visceral afferent fibres also end in the gastric and intestinal walls, digestive glands and the kidneys. Fibres ending in the gut and its ducts respond to stretch or contraction. Gastric impulses may evoke sensations of hunger and nausea.</div><div class="text" id="p0995">Visceral afferents that enter the spinal cord through spinal nerve roots branch extensively and synapse on viscerosomatic neurones in the dorsal horn and intermediate grey matter. Almost all the central processes of vagal and glossopharyngeal afferent fibres end in the nucleus solitarius of the medulla. About 5% of the vagal afferents project directly to, and terminate in, the upper cervical spinal cord (C1–C2), where they are believed to contribute to referred sensations, as well as to propriospinal mechanisms of nociceptive modulation. Visceral afferents establish connections within the CNS that mediate autonomic reflexes. In addition, afferent impulses probably mediate visceral sensations such as hunger, nausea, sexual excitement, vesical distension, etc. Visceral pain fibres may follow these routes. Although viscera are insensitive to cutting, crushing or burning, excessive tension in smooth muscle and some pathological conditions produce visceral pain. In visceral disease, vague pain may be felt near the viscus itself (visceral pain) or in a cutaneous area or other tissue whose somatic afferents enter spinal segments receiving afferents from the viscus, a phenomenon known as referred pain. If inflammation spreads from a diseased viscus to the adjacent parietal serosa (e.g. the peritoneum), somatic afferents will be stimulated, causing local somatic pain, which is commonly spasmodic. Referred pain is often associated with local cutaneous tenderness. For further reading on visceral pain, see <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib11" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_11">Bielefeldt and Gebhart (2013)</a>.</div><div class="text" id="p1000">Afferent fibres in pelvic splanchnic nerves innervate pelvic viscera and the distal part of the colon. Vesical receptors are widespread; those in muscle strata are associated with thickly myelinated fibres and are believed to be stretch receptors, possibly activated by contraction. Pain fibres from the bladder and proximal urethra traverse both the pelvic splanchnic nerves and the inferior hypogastric plexus, hypogastric nerves, superior hypogastric plexus and lumbar splanchnic nerves to reach their cell bodies in ganglia on the lower thoracic and upper lumbar dorsal spinal roots; the significance of this dual sensory pathway is uncertain. Lesions of the cauda equina abolish pain from vesical overdistension, but hypogastric section is ineffective. Pain fibres from the uterus traverse the hypogastric plexus and lumbar splanchnic nerves to reach somata in the lowest thoracic and upper lumbar spinal ganglia, and hypogastric division may relieve dysmenorrhoea. Afferents from the uterine cervix traverse the pelvic splanchnic nerves to reach their somata in the upper sacral spinal ganglia; stretching the cervix uteri causes pain but cauterization and biopsy excisions do not.</div><div class="text" id="p1005">In general, afferent fibres that accompany pre- and postganglionic sympathetic fibres have a segmental arrangement and end in spinal cord segments from which preganglionic fibres innervate the region or viscus concerned. General visceral afferents entering thoracic and upper lumbar spinal segments are largely concerned with pain. Nociceptive impulses from the pharynx, oesophagus, stomach, intestines, kidneys, ureter, gallbladder and bile ducts seem to be carried in sympathetic pathways. Cardiac nociceptive impulses enter the spinal cord in the first to fifth thoracic spinal nerves, mainly via the middle and inferior cardiac nerves, but some fibres pass directly to the spinal nerves. It is said that there are no general visceral afferents in the superior cardiac nerves. Peripherally, the fibres pass through the cardiac plexuses and along the coronary arteries. Myocardial anoxia may evoke symptoms of angina pectoris in which pain is typically presternal, and is also referred to much of the left chest, and radiates to the left shoulder, the medial aspect of the left arm, along the left side of the neck to the jaw and occiput, and down to the epigastrium. Cardiac afferents carried in vagal cardiac branches are concerned with the reflex depression of cardiac activity. Ureteric pain fibres, also running with sympathetic fibres, are presumably involved in the agonizing renal colic that follows obstruction by calculi. Afferent fibres from the testis and ovary run through the corresponding plexuses to somata in the tenth and eleventh thoracic dorsal root ganglia.</div><div class="text" id="p1010">Some primary afferent neurones, innervating the gut, lungs, heart and blood vessels, also appear to have an efferent function in that they release transmitters from their peripheral endings during the axon reflex. The primary substances released in this way are substance P, calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) and ATP. These act on target cells to produce vasodilation, increased venular permeability, changes in smooth muscle contractility, degranulation of mast cells and a variety of effects on leukocytes and fibroblasts, a process collectively known as ‘peripheral neurogenic inflammation’. The local release of such substances may play a trophic role in the maintenance of tissue integrity and repair in response to injury (for further reading, see <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib137" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_137">Xanthos and Sandkühler (2014)</a>).</div></section></section></section></section>



<section><a id="s0835"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle0645">Rami of the Spinal Nerves</h2><div class="textfl" id="p1015">Spinal nerves exit from the vertebral canal via their corresponding intervertebral foramina. They then divide to form a large ventral (anterior) ramus and a smaller dorsal (posterior) ramus. In general terms, the ventral rami innervate the limbs and the muscles and skin of the anterolateral trunk. The axons within the ventral rami serving the neck, upper and lower limbs are redistributed within cervical, brachial and lumbosacral plexuses, respectively. Thoracic ventral rami run independently and retain a largely segmental distribution. Dorsal (posterior) rami of spinal nerves are usually smaller than the ventral rami and are directed posteriorly. Retaining a segmental distribution, all, except for the first cervical, fourth and fifth sacral and the coccygeal, divide into medial and lateral branches that supply the muscles and skin of the posterior regions of the neck and trunk (see <a href="../B9780702077050000471/B9780702077050000471.xhtml#f0055">Fig. 47.8</a>).</div><section><a id="s0840"/><hgroup><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle0650">Dorsal rami</h3><h4 class="h3after2" id="cesectitle0655">Cervical dorsal spinal rami</h4></hgroup><section><a id="s0845"/><div class="textfl" id="p1020">Each cervical spinal dorsal ramus, except the first, divides into medial and lateral branches that all innervate muscles. In general, only medial branches of the second to fourth, and usually the fifth, supply the skin. Except for the first and second, each dorsal ramus passes posteriorly medial to a posterior intertransverse muscle (which it supplies), curving round the articular process into the interval between semispinalis capitis and semispinalis cervicis.</div><section><a id="s0850"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0660">First cervical dorsal ramus (suboccipital nerve)</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1025">The first cervical dorsal ramus, the suboccipital nerve, is larger than the ventral (see <a href="../B978070207705000046X/B978070207705000046X_split_a.xhtml#f0440">Fig. 46.78</a>). It emerges superior to the posterior arch of the atlas and inferior to the vertebral artery, and enters the suboccipital triangle to supply rectus capitis posterior major and minor, obliquus capitis superior and inferior, and semispinalis capitis. A filament from the branch to inferior oblique joins the second dorsal ramus. The suboccipital nerve occasionally has a cutaneous branch that accompanies the occipital artery to the scalp, and connects with the greater and lesser occipital nerves. It may also communicate with the accessory nerve.</div></section><section><a id="s0855"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0665">Second cervical dorsal ramus</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1030">The second cervical dorsal ramus is slightly larger than the ventral and all the other cervical dorsal rami (see <a href="../B9780702077050000367/B9780702077050000367.xhtml#f0080">Figs 36.22</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000046X/B978070207705000046X_split_a.xhtml#f0440">46.78</a>). It runs between the lamina of the axis and inferior oblique, below which it divides into a large medial and smaller lateral branch. The dorsal ramus or its medial branch receives communicating branches from the first cervical dorsal ramus that pass both through and around inferior oblique. A descending communicating branch crosses the facet joint between the second and third cervical vertebrae to reach the third cervical dorsal ramus.</div><section><a id="s0860"/><section><a id="s0865"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0670">Greater occipital nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p1035">The medial branch, termed the greater occipital nerve, passes transversely across inferior oblique deep to semispinalis capitis, which it innervates. Near the origin of inferior oblique, it turns rostrally along rectus capitis posterior major, where it receives a communicating branch <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E31" id="pagebreak_1.464E31"/><a id="pg1464.e29"/>from the third occipital nerve before turning dorsally to pierce semispinalis capitis. It emerges on to the scalp by passing above an aponeurotic sling between trapezius and sternocleidomastoid near their occipital attachments. It ascends with the occipital artery and divides into branches that connect with the third occipital and lesser occipital nerves, and which supply the back of the auricle and the skin of the scalp as far forwards as the coronal suture. The lateral branch of the second cervical dorsal ramus supplies longissimus capitis, semispinalis capitis and splenius capitis, and sends a communicating branch to the lateral branch of the third cervical dorsal ramus.</div><section><a id="s0870"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle0675">Greater occipital neuralgia</p><div class="textfl" id="p1040">Greater occipital neuralgia is a syndrome of pain and paraesthesiae felt in the distribution of the greater occipital nerve. This is usually caused by damage or irritation to the greater occipital nerve but more rarely can result from a similar process in the lesser occipital nerve or both greater and lesser occipital nerves. A similar syndrome may be caused by upper facet joint arthritis involving the second cervical root (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib129" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_129">Vanelderen et al 2010</a>).</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s0875"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0680">Third cervical dorsal ramus</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1045">The third cervical dorsal ramus is intermediate in size between the second and fourth. It courses back round the articular pillar of the third cervical vertebra, medial to the posterior intertransverse muscle, and divides into medial and lateral branches. The lateral branch passes dorsally across the surface of semispinalis capitis to supply it and the overlying longissimus capitis and splenius capitis. It receives a communicating branch from the lateral branch of the second cervical dorsal ramus, and sends a similar branch to the lateral branch of the fourth cervical dorsal ramus. The deep medial branch curves dorsally and medially around the waist of the articular pillar before ending in multifidus. It sends an articular branch to the facet joint between the third and fourth cervical vertebrae, and may also send a branch into semispinalis capitis. The superficial medial branch, the third occipital nerve, curves around the lateral and dorsal surfaces of the facet joint between the second and third cervical vertebrae, which it supplies. It continues transversely, deep to semispinalis, which it supplies, and sends a communicating branch to the greater occipital nerve. Just above the second cervical spinal process, the third occipital nerve turns dorsally to pierce semispinalis capitis, splenius capitis and trapezius, and becomes cutaneous over a small area immediately below the superior nuchal line. Communicating branches join the cutaneous branches of the greater and lesser occipital nerves.</div></section><section><a id="s0880"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0685">Dorsal rami of the lower five cervical nerves</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1050">The dorsal rami of the lower five cervical nerves curve back round the vertebral articular pillars and divide into lateral and medial branches. The lateral branches supply longissimus cervicis, splenius cervicis and iliocostalis cervicis. The medial branches curve around the lateral and dorsal surfaces of the articular pillar of their segment, deep to semispinalis capitis. They send articular branches to the facet joints above and below their course before entering and supplying multifidus. Terminal branches reach interspinalis at each segment. Cutaneous branches arise consistently from the fourth, and commonly from the fifth, sixth and eighth, but not usually from the seventh medial branches. These branches pass across multifidus or through semispinalis cervicis and turn dorsally around the medial border of semispinalis capitis, to pierce splenius cervicis and trapezius and reach the skin.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0885"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0690">Thoracic dorsal spinal rami</h4><div class="textfl" id="p1055">The dorsal rami of the thoracic spinal nerves supply the intrinsic muscles of the back and the overlying postvertebral skin on a segmental basis (see <a href="../B978070207705000046X/B978070207705000046X.xhtml#f0020">Figs 46.3</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000471/B9780702077050000471.xhtml#f0055">47.8</a>). At each segmental level, they pass dorsally through an aperture bounded by the transverse processes superiorly and inferiorly, the facet joint medially and the superior costotransverse ligament laterally. Thereafter, each dorsal ramus follows a prolonged course laterally, between the anterior lamella of the superior costotransverse ligament anteriorly, and the costolamellar ligament and the posterior lamella of the superior costotransverse ligament posteriorly. In this narrow space, the dorsal ramus divides into lateral and medial branches. The lateral branches continue laterally as far as the costotransverse joint, above which they turn dorsally and inferiorly to supply levatores costarum, and enter longissimus thoracis and iliocostalis. Lateral branches from the upper six thoracic dorsal rami remain intramuscular. Those from the lower six levels emerge from iliocostalis lumborum to pierce serratus posterior inferior and latissimus dorsi in line with the costal angles. They descend across as many as four ribs before becoming superficial. The twelfth thoracic lateral branch sends a filament medially along the iliac crest and then passes down to the anterior gluteal skin. Some upper thoracic lateral branches may become cutaneous.</div><div class="text" id="p1060">Each medial branch hooks dorsally around the lateral margin of the posterior lamella of the superior costotransverse ligament, lying a variable distance above the tip of the transverse process. At the first to fourth, and at the ninth and tenth thoracic levels, the medial branches cross the superior tip of the transverse process to turn inferiorly and medially across the posterior surface of the transverse process, lying between the attachment sites of multifidus medially and semispinalis laterally. Each nerve continues this oblique course to supply multifidus and semispinalis. At the fifth to eighth thoracic levels, the medial branches assume a course parallel to that of other levels, but do not reach the transverse process, instead passing superior and dorsal to the plane of the transverse processes. At the eleventh and twelfth levels, in keeping with the relatively short transverse processes at these levels, the medial branches run close to the superior articular processes. Each medial branch supplies articular branches to the facet joints above and below its course. Medial branches of the upper six thoracic dorsal rami furnish cutaneous branches that pierce trapezius and the rhomboids to reach the skin near the spinous processes. Cutaneous branches may occasionally arise from the medial branches of the lower six thoracic dorsal rami.</div></section><section><a id="s0890"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0695">Lumbar dorsal spinal rami</h4><div class="textfl" id="p1065">After leaving its spinal nerve, each of the first to fourth lumbar dorsal rami passes through an aperture in the dorsal leaf of the intertransverse ligament just above a transverse process (see <a href="../B9780702077050000471/B9780702077050000471.xhtml#f0065">Fig. 47.10</a>). Each dorsal ramus supplies the overlying medial intertransverse muscle before dividing into lateral and medial branches. The lateral branches supply the longissimus and iliocostalis components of the lumbar erector spinae. The upper three lumbar lateral branches emerge from the lateral border of iliocostalis lumborum and pierce the aponeurosis of latissimus dorsi to become cutaneous. They cross the iliac crest to reach the gluteal skin; some reach as far as the level of the greater trochanter. Medial branches cross the junction of the superior articular process and transverse process, and hook medially between the mammillary and accessory processes, deep to the mammillo-accessory ligament. Medial to the ligament, each medial branch sends articular branches to the facet joints above and below its course, before entering multifidus, which it supplies. Medial branch blocks are quite useful in the treatment of facet-mediated low back pain. Terminal branches reach interspinalis at each segment.</div><div class="text" id="p1070">The fifth dorsal ramus has a longer course than other dorsal rami. It arches over the ala of the sacrum, lying against the root of the first sacral superior articular process. Opposite the base of the lumbosacral joint, it sends a branch into the lowest fibres of longissimus thoracis, and a communicating branch to the first sacral dorsal ramus, before terminating as a branch that hooks around the lumbosacral joint to end in multifidus.</div></section><section><a id="s0895"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0700">Sacral dorsal spinal rami</h4><div class="textfl" id="p1075">Sacral dorsal rami are small, diminishing in size inferiorly; other than the fifth, all emerge through the dorsal sacral foramina. The upper three are covered at their exit by multifidus, and divide into medial and lateral branches. Medial branches are small and end in multifidus. Lateral branches join together and with branches of the last lumbar and fourth sacral dorsal rami to form loops dorsal to the sacrum. Branches from these loops run dorsal to the sacrotuberous ligament and form a second series of loops under gluteus maximus. From these, two or three gluteal branches pierce gluteus maximus (along a line from the posterior superior iliac spine to the coccygeal apex) to supply the posterior gluteal skin.</div><div class="text" id="p1080">The dorsal rami of the fourth and fifth sacral nerves are small and lie caudal to multifidus. They unite with each other and with the coccygeal dorsal ramus to form loops dorsal to the sacrum; filaments from these supply the skin over the coccyx.</div></section><section><a id="s0900"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0705">Coccygeal dorsal spinal ramus</h4><div class="textfl" id="p1085">The coccygeal dorsal spinal ramus does not divide into medial and lateral branches. It communicates with the fourth and fifth sacral dorsal rami.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0905"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle0710">Ventral rami</h3><div class="textfl" id="p1090">Ventral rami innervate the skin of the anterolateral neck and trunk and the skin covering the upper and lower limbs. The second to the fourth cervical ventral rami (C2– C4) innervate the skin of the neck (branches from the cervical plexus); the fifth to the eighth cervical ventral rami (C5–C8) and the first thoracic ventral ramus (T1) innervate the skin of the upper limb (branches from the brachial plexus); the second thoracic to the first lumbar ventral rami (T2–L1) innervate the skin of the anterolateral trunk; the first or second thoracic ventral rami to the third sacral ventral ramus (L1/2–S3) innervate the skin of the lower limb and <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E32" id="pagebreak_1.464E32"/><a id="pg1464.e30"/>perineum (branches of the lumbar and sacral plexuses). Ventral rami supply the flexor musculature of the neck and body wall segmentally and the infrahyoid muscles and the muscles of the limbs via cervical (C1–C4), brachial (C5–T1/2), lumbar (L1–L4/5) and sacral (L4/5–S3) plexuses.</div><section><a id="s0910"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0715">Cervical ventral rami</h4><div class="textfl" id="p1095">Broadly speaking, cervical ventral rami innervate the anterior and lateral groups of prevertebral muscles; the respiratory diaphragm (via the phrenic nerve); the muscles and joints of the upper limb and most of the infrahyoid muscles; and the skin of the anterolateral neck, the radial side of the upper limb and the palmar and dorsal surfaces of the hand (via the cervical and brachial plexuses).</div><div class="text" id="p1100">Cervical ventral rami, except the first, appear between the anterior and posterior intertransverse muscles. The upper four form the cervical plexus, and the lower four, together with most of the first thoracic ventral ramus, form the brachial plexus. Each receives at least one grey ramus communicans, the upper four from the superior cervical sympathetic ganglion, the fifth and sixth from the middle ganglion, and the seventh and eighth from the cervicothoracic ganglion.</div><div class="text" id="p1105">The first cervical ventral ramus, the suboccipital nerve, emerges above the posterior arch of the atlas, and passes forwards lateral to its lateral mass and medial to the vertebral artery. It supplies rectus capitis lateralis, emerges medial to it, descends anterior to the transverse process of the atlas and posterior to the internal jugular vein, and joins the ascending branch of the second cervical ventral ramus.</div><div class="text" id="p1110">The second cervical ventral ramus issues between the vertebral arches of the atlas and axis. It ascends between their transverse processes, passes anterior to the first posterior intertransverse muscle and emerges lateral to the vertebral artery, generally between longus capitis and levator scapulae. The ramus divides into an ascending branch, which joins the first cervical nerve, and a descending branch, which joins the ascending branch of the third cervical ventral ramus.</div><div class="text" id="p1115">The third cervical ventral ramus appears between longus capitis and scalenus medius. The remaining ventral rami emerge between scalenus anterior and the scalenus medius.</div><section><a id="s0915"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0720">Phrenic nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1120">The phrenic nerve is a mixed somatic sensory and motor nerve that provides the sole motor supply to the respective hemirespiratory diaphragm. It is derived mostly from the ipsilateral fourth cervical ventral ramus, with contributions from the ipsilateral third and fifth cervical ventral rami (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0090">Figs 35.17</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0095">35.18</a>). The nerve is formed at the upper part of the lateral border of scalenus anterior and descends almost vertically across its anterior surface behind the prevertebral fascia. It descends posterior to sternocleidomastoid, the inferior belly of omohyoid (near its intermediate tendon), the internal jugular vein, transverse cervical and suprascapular arteries and, on the left, the thoracic duct. At the root of the neck, the phrenic nerve runs anterior to the second part of the subclavian artery, from which it is separated by scalenus anterior (some accounts state that on the left side the nerve passes anterior to the first part of the subclavian artery) and posterior to the subclavian vein. The phrenic nerve crosses serratus anterior from lateral to medial (lying under the prevertebral fascia) and enters the thorax by crossing medially anterior to the internal thoracic artery.</div><div class="text" id="p1125">In the neck, each nerve receives variable filaments from the cervical sympathetic ganglia or their branches and may also connect with internal thoracic sympathetic plexuses.</div><div class="text" id="p1130">Within the thoracic cavity, the right and left phrenic nerves descend anterior to the pulmonary hila, between the fibrous pericardium and mediastinal parietal pleura, accompanied by the pericardiacophrenic vessels. Each phrenic nerve supplies sensory branches to the mediastinal pleura, fibrous pericardium and parietal layer of serous pericardium: the right phrenic nerve supplies the part of the right crus that lies to the right of the oesophagus, and the left phrenic nerve supplies the left crus and the part of the right crus that lies on the left of the oesophagus.</div><div class="text" id="p1135">The right and left phrenic nerves differ in their intrathoracic relationships (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib96" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_96">Rajanna 1947</a>).</div><section><a id="s0920"/><section><a id="s0925"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0725">Right phrenic nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p1140">The right phrenic nerve is shorter and more vertical than the left. At the root of the neck it is separated from the second part of the right subclavian artery by scalenus anterior (see <a href="../B9780702077050000550/B9780702077050000550.xhtml#f0030">Fig. 55.10A</a>). It then passes inferomedially through the superior thoracic aperture between the first part of the right subclavian artery and the right subclavian vein. Occasionally, the right or left phrenic nerves may pass anterior to, or through the anterior wall of, the respective subclavian vein (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib89" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_89">Paraskevas et al 2011</a>). Around the level of the first rib or the first costal cartilage, the right phrenic nerve crosses the right internal thoracic artery either superiorly between the artery and the first rib, or inferiorly, pressed against the artery by the apex of the right lung and its covering pleura (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib87" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_87">Owens et al 1994</a>). The nerve continues to descend, passing immediately lateral to the right brachiocephalic vein, the superior vena cava, the fibrous pericardium covering the right side of the right atrium and the inferior vena cava. It branches just superior to, or at the level of, the respiratory diaphragm.</div></section><section><a id="s0930"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0730">Left phrenic nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p1145">At the root of the neck, the left phrenic nerve commonly leaves the medial border of scalenus anterior and passes anterior to the first part of the left subclavian artery and posterior to the left subclavian vein and the thoracic duct (see <a href="../B9780702077050000550/B9780702077050000550.xhtml#f0030">Fig. 55.10B</a>). Sometimes the right and left phrenic nerves are symmetrical in their cervical course, in which case the left phrenic nerve is initially separated from the second part of the left subclavian artery by scalenus anterior. After passing through the superior thoracic aperture the left phrenic nerve crosses the left internal thoracic artery, most commonly superiorly, around the level of the first rib or the first costal cartilage (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib87" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Owens et al 1994</a>). It descends across the medial aspect of the apex of the left lung and its pleural covering to pass between the left common carotid and left subclavian arteries. The nerve then descends anteromedially and passes anterior and close to the left vagus nerve while in the region superior to the aortic arch and posterior to the left brachiocephalic vein. It continues inferiorly, passing anterior to the left superior intercostal vein, the aortic arch and the left pulmonary hilum, after which it passes inferolaterally and to the left, over the fibrous pericardium covering the left atrium and left ventricle (see <a href="../B9780702077050000550/B9780702077050000550.xhtml#f0025">Fig. 55.9</a>). As it passes over the fibrous pericardium, the left phrenic nerve is located more anterior than the right phrenic nerve and is therefore at greater risk of damage during the placement of surgical incisions to access the pericardial cavity.</div><section><a id="s0935"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle0735">Diaphragmatic relationships</p><div class="textfl" id="p1150">The right phrenic nerve passes through the central tendon of the respiratory diaphragm, either via the caval foramen or just lateral to it. The left phrenic nerve passes through the muscular part of the respiratory diaphragm anterior to the central tendon, just lateral to the fibrous pericardium covering the left pulmonary border of the heart, and posterior to the cardiac apex (see <a href="../B9780702077050000550/B9780702077050000550.xhtml#f0025">Fig. 55.9</a>). At or slightly superior to the respiratory diaphragm each phrenic nerve supplies fine branches to the parietal pleura that lies above the central part of the diaphragm. Typically, the trunk of each nerve then divides into three branches (anterior or sternal, anterolateral and posterior) as it passes through the respiratory diaphragm (see <a href="../B9780702077050000550/B9780702077050000550.xhtml#f0035">Fig. 55.1A</a>). The main branches may be submerged in diaphragmatic muscle or lie inferior to it. They supply motor fibres to the muscle and sensory fibres to the peritoneum and pleura related to the central part of the respiratory diaphragm. They also relay proprioceptive fibres from the musculature. The anterior (sternal) branch runs anteromedially towards the sternum and connects with its contralateral counterpart. The anterolateral branch runs to the lateral folia of the central tendon. The short posterior branch divides into a posterolateral ramus that passes posterior to the left or right folia of the central tendon and a posterior ramus that supplies the crura of the respiratory diaphragm. The posterolateral and posterior crural branches may arise separately from the phrenic nerve.</div></section><section><a id="s0940"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle0740">Phrenic ganglia</p><div class="textfl" id="p1155">The right phrenic nerve continues its course inferior to the respiratory diaphragm and frequently connects to the right phrenic ganglion. An additional, smaller, right accessory phrenic ganglion is sometimes located proximally along the phrenic nerve, close to its exit from the caval foramen. The right phrenic ganglion has plexiform communications with the coeliac and aorticorenal ganglia and with the right suprarenal gland (see <a href="../B9780702077050000550/B9780702077050000550.xhtml#f0065">Fig. 55.11</a>). A left phrenic ganglion is less commonly seen; when present, it exhibits plexiform communications to several autonomic ganglia. Both phrenic nerves and ganglia are closely related to the diaphragmatic crura, therefore sutures for crural approximation in the repair of hiatal hernia must be placed superior to the ganglia in order to avoid iatrogenic injuries to the autonomic supply of the respiratory diaphragm and abdomen (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib64" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_64">Loukas et al 2016</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0945"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle0745">Referred pain</p><div class="textfl" id="p1160">Diaphragmatic irritation or pain is frequently felt at the tip of the shoulder, reflecting the common spinal nerve root origins of the phrenic and supraclavicular nerves (the ventral rami of the third and fourth cervical spinal nerves). It usually occurs when there is inflammation of the diaphragmatic parietal pleura, e.g. in basal pneumonia, pleural effusions, malignant disease, or irritation of the diaphragmatic parietal peritoneum, e.g. in pneumoperitoneum or subphrenic abscess, where involuntary diaphragmatic contraction (hiccups) may also occur.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0950"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0750">Accessory phrenic nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p1165">The accessory phrenic nerve is composed of fibres from the fifth cervical ventral ramus that run in a branch of the nerve to subclavius. This lies <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E33" id="pagebreak_1.464E33"/><a id="pg1464.e31"/>lateral to the phrenic nerve and descends posterior (occasionally anterior) to the subclavian vein. The accessory phrenic nerve usually joins the phrenic nerve near the first rib but may not do so until near the pulmonary hilum or beyond. The accessory phrenic nerve may be derived from the fourth or sixth cervical ventral rami or from the ansa cervicalis.</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s0955"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0755">Thoracic ventral rami</h4><div class="textfl" id="p1170">Thoracic ventral rami, unlike their cervical and lumbar counterparts, have retained a largely segmental distribution to the body wall (see <a href="../B9780702077050000240/B9780702077050000240.xhtml#f0055">Figs 24.10</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000471/B9780702077050000471.xhtml#f0050">47.7</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000537/B9780702077050000537.xhtml#f0020">53.3</a>). The first to the eleventh intercostal nerves pass in the intercostal spaces between adjacent ribs, and the twelfth (subcostal nerve) passes below the twelfth rib. Each is connected with an adjacent ganglion of the sympathetic trunk by pre- and postganglionic branches (white and grey rami communicantes, respectively) (see <a href="../B9780702077050000240/B9780702077050000240.xhtml#f0070">Figs 24.13</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000537/B9780702077050000537.xhtml#f0085">53.21</a>). The majority of the intercostal nerves are distributed to the thoracic and, in the case of the more inferiorly located nerves, abdominal walls. The greater part of the first thoracic ventral ramus passes into the brachial plexus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000483/B9780702077050000483.xhtml#f0045">Fig. 48.6</a>), together with variable proportions of the second and sometimes third thoracic ventral rami via the intercostobrachial nerves. The fourth to sixth intercostal nerves supply only the thoracic wall, whereas the seventh to eleventh nerves supply the thoracic and abdominal walls. The subcostal nerve is distributed to the abdominal wall and skin covering the superior part of the lateral aspect of the gluteal region and thigh. Communicating branches may link the intercostal nerves across the intercostal spaces posteriorly (see <a href="../B9780702077050000562/B9780702077050000562.xhtml#f0030">Fig. 56.6</a>). The breast is mainly innervated by the anterior and lateral cutaneous branches of the fourth to sixth intercostal nerves. The nipple is innervated by a plexus formed primarily from cutaneous branches of the fourth intercostal nerve.</div><div class="text" id="p1175">The ventral rami of the sixth to eleventh intercostal nerves, the subcostal nerve (twelfth thoracic) and first lumbar nerve (iliohypogastric and ilioinguinal nerves) innervate the muscles and skin of the anterior abdominal wall (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib101" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_101">Rozen et al 2008</a>). The seventh to the twelfth thoracic ventral rami continue anteriorly into the abdominal wall (see <a href="../B9780702077050000604/B9780702077050000604.xhtml#f0020">Fig. 60.5</a>). Approaching the costal arch, the seventh to tenth intercostal nerves curve medially across the deep surface of the costal cartilages between the digitations of the respiratory diaphragm and transversus abdominis. The subcostal nerve often gives a branch to the first lumbar ventral ramus (dorsolumbar nerve), and in these cases, therefore, contributes to the lumbar plexus. It accompanies the subcostal vessels along the inferior border of the twelfth rib, passing posterior to the lateral arcuate ligament and kidney, and anterior to the proximal part of quadratus lumborum.</div><div class="text" id="p1180">All these segmental nerves run anteriorly within a thin layer of fascia in the neurovascular plane between transversus abdominis and internal abdominal oblique, where they branch and interconnect with adjacent nerves and give off branches to the lateral musculature (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib101" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Rozen et al 2008</a>). Cutaneous branches supply the skin of the lateral and anterior abdominal walls. The nerves enter the rectus sheath at its lateral margin by penetrating the posterior lamina of internal abdominal oblique and penetrating rectus abdominis on its posterior aspect. Here they give off muscular branches to rectus abdominis, transversus abdominis and pyramidalis and cutaneous branches that pierce the anterior layer of the rectus sheath to supply overlying skin.</div><div class="text" id="p1185">The ninth intercostal nerve supplies skin proximal to the umbilicus, the tenth intercostal nerve supplies skin that consistently includes the umbilicus, and the eleventh intercostal nerve supplies skin distal to the umbilicus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000240/B9780702077050000240.xhtml#f0055">Figs 24.10</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000604/B9780702077050000604.xhtml#f0020">60.5</a>). The subcostal nerve supplies the skin over the anterior gluteal region just distal to the iliac crest and the skin of the distal abdomen and inguinal region (overlapping with the L1 dermatome in this region) (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib62" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_62">Lee et al 2008</a>). A typical dermatome map of the anterior abdominal wall is shown in <a href="../B9780702077050000240/B9780702077050000240.xhtml#f0055">Fig. 24.10</a>. The inferior intercostal nerves and subcostal nerve also provide sensory fibres to the costal parts of the respiratory diaphragm and parietal peritoneum.</div><div class="text" id="p1190">The anterolateral abdominal wall muscles are innervated by several segmental nerves and injury to a single nerve rarely causes a clinically detectable loss of muscle tone. The overlap between sequential dermatomes means that significant cutaneous anaesthesia and muscle denervation are appreciated only after at least two sequential nerves have been surgically sectioned.</div></section></section></section>


<section><a id="s0960"/><hgroup><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle0760">Peripheral Nerve Plexuses</h2><h3 class="h2after1" id="cesectitle0765">Cervical plexus</h3></hgroup><section><a id="s0965"/><div class="textfl" id="p1195">The cervical plexus is formed by the ventral rami of the upper four cervical nerves, and supplies some neck muscles, including most of the infrahyoid group, and areas of skin on the head, neck and chest (see <a href="../B9780702077050000331/B9780702077050000331.xhtml#f0045">Figs 33.6</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0030">35.5B</a>). It lies in the neck opposite a line drawn down the side of the neck from the root of the auricle to the level of the upper border of the thyroid cartilage. It lies deep to the internal jugular vein, the deep fascia and sternocleidomastoid, and anterior to scalenus medius and levator scapulae. Each ramus, except the first, divides into ascending and descending parts, which unite in communicating loops. Cutaneous branches from the first loop (second and third cervical ventral rami) supply the head and neck, and those from the second loop (third and fourth cervical ventral rami) supply the shoulder and chest. Muscular and communicating branches arise from the same nerves. The branches are superficial or deep: superficial branches perforate the cervical fascia to supply the skin and either ascend (the lesser occipital, great auricular and transverse cervical nerves) or descend (supraclavicular nerves) (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0010">Fig. 35.1B</a>). Deep branches form medial and lateral series and generally supply muscles.</div><section><a id="s0970"/><section><a id="s0975"/><h4 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0770">Lesser occipital nerve</h4><div class="textfl" id="p1200">The lesser occipital nerve is derived mainly from the second cervical ventral ramus (although fibres from the third cervical nerve may sometimes contribute). It first passes anterior to the plane of the accessory nerve before winding around it and becoming anterior to it. It next ascends along the posterior margin of sternocleidomastoid. Near the cranium it perforates the deep fascia and passes up on to the scalp behind the auricle to supply the skin and connect with the great auricular and greater occipital nerves and the auricular branch of the facial nerve. Its auricular branch supplies the skin on the upper third of the medial aspect of the auricle and connects with the posterior branch of the great auricular nerve. The auricular branch is occasionally derived from the greater occipital nerve. It has been suggested that compression or stretching of the lesser occipital nerve contributes to cervicogenic headache (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib67" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_67">Lucas et al 1994</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0980"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0775">Great auricular nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1205">The great auricular nerve is the largest ascending branch of the cervical plexus. It arises from the second and third cervical ventral rami, encircles the posterior border of sternocleidomastoid, perforates the deep fascia and ascends on the muscle beneath platysma with the external jugular vein. On reaching the parotid gland, it divides into anterior and posterior branches. The anterior branch is distributed to the facial skin over the parotid gland and connects in the gland with the facial nerve. This cross-innervation between somatic sensory fibres and parasympathetic secretomotor fibres is considered to be part of the anatomical basis for the phenomenon of gustatory sweating (Frey’s syndrome), seen after parotidectomy with its inherent disruption of the secretomotor nerve supply. The posterior branch supplies the skin over the mastoid process and on the back of the auricle (except its upper part); a filament pierces the auricle to reach the lateral surface, where it is distributed to the lobule and concha. Efforts are made to preserve the posterior branch at parotid surgery in order to avoid a sensory deficit of the auricle. The posterior branch communicates with the lesser occipital nerve, the auricular branch of the vagus and the posterior auricular branch of the facial nerve. Division of the greater auricular nerve during neck surgery results in loss of sensation of a variable amount of the lower half of the auricle, which some patients initially find unpleasant.</div></section><section><a id="s0985"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0780">Transverse cervical nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1210">The transverse cervical nerve arises from the second and third cervical ventral rami. It curves round the posterior border of sternocleidomastoid near its midpoint and runs obliquely forwards, deep to the external jugular vein, to the anterior border of the muscle. It perforates the deep cervical fascia, and divides under platysma into ascending and descending branches that are distributed to the anterolateral areas of the neck. The ascending branches ascend to the submandibular region, forming a plexus with the cervical branch of the facial nerve beneath platysma. Some branches pierce platysma and are distributed to the skin of the upper anterior areas of the neck. The descending branches pierce platysma and are distributed anterolaterally to the skin of the neck.</div></section><section><a id="s0990"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0785">Supraclavicular nerves</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1215">The supraclavicular nerves arise from a common trunk formed from branches from the third and fourth cervical ventral rami and emerge at the posterior border of sternocleidomastoid. Descending under platysma and the deep cervical fascia, the trunk divides into medial, intermediate and lateral (posterior) branches, which diverge to pierce the deep fascia a little above the clavicle. The medial supraclavicular nerves run inferomedially across the external jugular vein and the clavicular and sternal heads of sternocleidomastoid to supply the skin as far as the midline and as low as the second rib. They also supply the sternoclavicular joint. The intermediate supraclavicular nerves cross the clavicle to supply the skin over pectoralis major and deltoid down to the <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E34" id="pagebreak_1.464E34"/><a id="pg1464.e32"/>level of the second rib, next to the area of supply of the second thoracic nerve. Overlap between these nerves is minimal. The lateral supraclavicular nerves descend superficially across trapezius and the acromion, supplying the skin of the upper and posterior parts of the shoulder.</div></section><section><a id="s0995"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0790">Deep branches – medial series</h5><section><a id="s1000"/><section><a id="s1005"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0795">Communicating branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p1220">Communicating branches pass from the loop between the first and second cervical ventral rami to the vagus and hypoglossal nerves and to the sympathetic trunk. The hypoglossal branch later leaves the hypoglossal nerve as a series of branches, namely: the meningeal, superior root of ansa cervicalis, nerves to thyrohyoid and geniohyoid. A branch also connects the fourth and fifth cervical ventral rami. The first four cervical ventral rami each receive a grey ramus communicans from the superior cervical sympathetic ganglion.</div><div class="text" id="p1225">The superior root of the ansa cervicalis (descendens hypoglossi) (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0040">Figs 35.7A</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0045">35.8</a>) leaves the hypoglossal nerve where it curves round the occipital artery and then descends anterior to or in the carotid sheath. It contains fibres from the first cervical ventral ramus. After giving a branch to the superior belly of omohyoid, it is joined by the inferior root of the ansa from the second and third cervical ventral rami. The two roots form the ansa cervicalis (ansa hypoglossi), from which branches supply sternohyoid, sternothyroid and the inferior belly of omohyoid. Another branch is said to descend anterior to the vessels into the thorax to join the cardiac and phrenic nerves.</div></section><section><a id="s1010"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0800">Muscular branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p1230">Muscular branches supply rectus capitis lateralis (C1), rectus capitis anterior (C1, C2), longus capitis (C1–C3) and longus colli (C2–C4). The inferior root of the ansa cervicalis and the phrenic nerve are additional muscular branches.</div><div class="text" id="p1235">The inferior root of the ansa cervicalis (nervus descendens cervicalis) (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0040">Figs 35.7A</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0045">35.8</a>) is formed by the union of branches from the second and third cervical ventral rami. It descends on the lateral side of the internal jugular vein, crosses it a little below the middle of the neck, and continues forwards to join the superior root anterior to the common carotid artery, forming the ansa cervicalis (ansa hypoglossi), from which all infrahyoid muscles except thyrohyoid are supplied. The inferior root almost always comes from the second and third cervical ventral rami, but sometimes from the second to fourth, and occasionally from the third alone. Occasionally, it may be derived either from the second alone or from the first to third cervical ventral rami.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s1015"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0805">Deep branches – lateral series</h5><section><a id="s1020"/><section><a id="s1025"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0810">Communicating branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p1240">Lateral deep branches of the cervical plexus (C2–C4) may connect with the accessory nerve within sternocleidomastoid, the posterior triangle or beneath trapezius.</div></section><section><a id="s1030"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0815">Muscular branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p1245">Muscular branches are distributed to sternocleidomastoid (C2–C4), trapezius (C2 and possibly C3), levator scapulae (C3, C4) and scalenus medius (C3, C4). Branches to trapezius cross the posterior triangle obliquely below the accessory nerve.</div></section></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s1035"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle0820">Brachial plexus</h3><div class="textfl" id="p1250">The brachial plexus is formed by the union of the ventral rami of the lower four cervical nerves and the greater part of the ventral ramus of the first thoracic spinal nerve. It may also receive contributions from the fourth cervical and second thoracic ventral rami. As its name suggests, its branches supply the muscles, joints and skin of the upper limb.</div><div class="text" id="p1255">At its origin, the brachial plexus lies in the posterior triangle of the neck, in the angle between the clavicle and the lower posterior border of sternocleidomastoid. It emerges between the scaleni anterior and medius, superior to the third part of the subclavian artery, and is covered by platysma, deep fascia and skin, through which it is palpable (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0090">Fig. 35.17</a>). It is crossed by the supraclavicular nerves, the nerve to subclavius, the inferior belly of omohyoid, the external jugular vein and the superficial ramus of the transverse cervical artery. The plexus passes posterior to the medial two-thirds of the clavicle, subclavius and the suprascapular vessels, and lies on the first digitation of serratus anterior and subscapularis. In the axilla, the lateral and posterior cords of the brachial plexus are anterior and lateral to the first part of the axillary artery, respectively, and the medial cord is behind the artery. The cords assume their appropriate relations around the second part of the artery, deep to pectoralis major. In the lower axilla, the cords divide into nerves that supply the upper limb (see <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0180">Fig. 49.35</a>). Other than the medial root of the median nerve, these nerves are related to the third part of the artery in the same way as their cords are related to the second part, i.e. branches of the lateral cord are lateral to the artery, branches of the medial cord are medial, and branches of the posterior cord are posterior.</div></section></section>


<section><a id="s1040"/><section><a id="s1045"/><section><a id="s1050"/><section><a id="s1055"/><section><a id="s1060"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle0825">Blood supply</p><div class="textfl" id="p1260">The blood supply to the brachial plexus is derived from vessels that arise from the subclavian and vertebral arteries. Important branches pass from the vertebral artery to the fifth and sixth cervical ventral rami and the more proximal cervical nerves. Branches from the costocervical trunk provide a rich supply to the eighth cervical and first thoracic ventral rami. Extensive contributions come from the suprascapular and superficial cervical arteries that arise from the thyrocervical trunk. In at least one-third of cases the superficial cervical and dorsal scapular arteries arise from the thyrocervical trunk as the transverse cervical artery. In clinical terms, the arteries arising from the thyrocervical trunk have become the lifeline to the upper limb and must be preserved during operations in cases when the ruptured subclavian artery has not been repaired. The dorsal scapular artery may arise from the third part of the subclavian artery to pass between the upper and middle trunks of the brachial plexus.</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s1065"/><h4 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0830">Trunks of the brachial plexus</h4><div class="textfl" id="p1265">The upper trunk is formed by the fifth and sixth cervical ventral rami, where these nerves emerge from deep to scalenus anterior. The middle trunk is the continuation of the seventh cervical ventral ramus. The lower trunk is formed by the eighth cervical and first thoracic ventral rami, and passes over the anterosuperior surface of the first rib. The first thoracic ventral ramus takes an upward course across the deep face of the neck of the first rib behind the pleura and the vertebral and subclavian arteries towards the lower trunk. The formation of the trunks is fairly consistent; they lie in front of one another rather than side by side, with the subclavian artery passing anteromedially. The phrenic nerve crosses the fifth cervical ventral ramus to pass anteromedially on the surface of scalenus anterior. The upper trunk, its divisions and the suprascapular nerve can all be palpated in the supraclavicular fossa in a subject of normal physique. The examining finger identifies first the subclavian pulse and then the nerves, whilst rolling the fingertip laterally (see Video 48.1).</div></section><section><a id="s1070"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0835">Divisions of the brachial plexus</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1270">The trunks divide into anterior and posterior divisions. The upper trunk divides 2–3<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm above the clavicle, and the divisions of the middle and lower trunks are formed deep to the clavicle. The posterior divisions of the upper and middle trunks are consistently larger than their anterior divisions. The posterior division of the lower trunk is consistently smaller than the anterior division and is absent in about 10% of cases.</div></section><section><a id="s1075"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0840">Cords of the brachial plexus</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1275">The cords are formed by the confluence of divisions: the lateral cord from the anterior divisions of the upper and middle trunks; the posterior cord by all three posterior divisions; and the medial cord by the anterior division of the lower trunk and, sometimes, by a branch from the anterior division of the middle trunks. The divisions of the trunks and the formation of the cords represent an important anatomical and functional differentiation. The posterior divisions and posterior cord innervate postaxial (extensor) musculature; the anterior divisions and the lateral and medial cords innervate preaxial (flexor) musculature.</div><div class="text" id="p1280">The formation and relations of the three cords are variable and, indeed, their designations somewhat misleading. Immediately inferior to the clavicle, the posterior cord is lateral, the medial cord is posterior, and the lateral cord is anterior, in relation to the axillary artery; the cords assume their appropriate relations about the axillary artery deep to pectoralis minor. There is considerable variation in this arrangement; most commonly, the axillary artery lies anterior to the three cords and the median nerve.</div><div class="text" id="p1285">The branches of the posterior cord, the largest of the three trunks, are consistent. In sequence, they are the upper subscapular, thoracodorsal, lower subscapular, axillary and radial nerves. The branches of the medial cord are usually predictable; the medial pectoral nerve and medial cutaneous nerve of the forearm are succeeded by the division into the medial root of the median nerve and the ulnar nerve. The ulnar nerve may arise as two or three branches. The greatest variation in the formation of trunk nerves is found within the lateral cord. Occasionally, the musculocutaneous nerve arises more distally than usual, either directly from the lateral cord as two or three branches or even from the median nerve itself. Sometimes, the highest of these branches enters coracobrachialis no more than 2 or 3<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm below the coracoid process. The lateral root of the <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E35" id="pagebreak_1.464E35"/><a id="pg1464.e33"/>median nerve may arise as two or three branches, and in some cases, it appears as a branch of the musculocutaneous nerve.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1080"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle0845">Terminal branches of the brachial plexus</h3><section><a id="s1085"/><section><a id="s1090"/><h4 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0850">Suprascapular nerve</h4><div class="textfl" id="p1290">The suprascapular nerve (fifth and sixth cervical ventral rami) is a large branch of the upper trunk: it is usually the first branch of the upper trunk but frequently arises directly from the fifth cervical ventral ramus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0090">Figs 35.17</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0180">49.35</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p1295">It runs laterally, deep to trapezius and omohyoid, and enters the supraspinous fossa through the suprascapular notch inferior to the superior transverse scapular ligament. It runs deep to supraspinatus and supplies it. It curves round the lateral border of the spine of the scapula with the suprascapular artery to reach the infraspinous fossa, where it gives two branches to infraspinatus and articular rami to the glenohumeral and acromioclavicular joints. The suprascapular nerve rarely has a cutaneous branch: when present, it pierces deltoid close to the tip of the acromion and supplies the skin of the proximal third of the arm within the territory of the axillary nerve.</div><div class="text" id="p1300">The suprascapular nerve is essential for abduction and lateral rotation at the glenohumeral joint. When the nerve or the rotator cuff is torn, or both are injured, the ISHA is so reduced that the patient is unable to move the arm away from the body. At rest, the head of the humerus drops inferiorly and migrates proximally in attempted abduction (see <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0235">Fig. 49.41</a>). In isolated cuff tears, the ISHA opens to about 30° or even more. In isolated axillary palsy, the ISHA is sometimes normal, or, more often, reduced by about 20° (see <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0240">Figs 49.42</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0245">49.43</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s1095"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0855">Nerve to subclavius</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1305">The slender nerve to subclavius (fifth and sixth cervical ventral rami) springs from the upper trunk and passes anteriorly. It descends anterior to the plexus and the subclavian artery and passes above the subclavian vein to supply subclavius.</div></section><section><a id="s1100"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0860">Lateral pectoral nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1310">The lateral pectoral nerve (fifth and sixth cervical ventral rami) is larger than the medial, and may arise either from the anterior divisions of the upper and middle trunks, or by a single branch from the lateral cord, just above or deep to the clavicle. It crosses anterior to the axillary artery and vein, pierces the clavipectoral fascia and supplies the deep surface of pectoralis major. It sends a branch to the medial pectoral nerve, forming a loop in front of the first part of the axillary artery to supply some fibres to pectoralis minor.</div></section><section><a id="s1105"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0865">Medial pectoral nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1315">The medial pectoral nerve (eighth cervical and first thoracic ventral rami) branches from the medial cord while the latter lies posterior to the axillary artery and curves forwards between the axillary artery and vein. Anterior to the artery, it joins a ramus of the lateral pectoral nerve and enters the deep surface of pectoralis minor, which it supplies. Two or three branches pierce pectoralis minor and others may pass round its inferior border to end in pectoralis major.</div></section><section><a id="s1110"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0870">Upper (superior) subscapular nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1320">The superior subscapular nerve is smaller than the inferior. It arises from the posterior cord (fifth and sixth cervical ventral rami), enters subscapularis at a high level, and is frequently double.</div></section><section><a id="s1115"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0875">Lower (inferior) subscapular nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1325">The inferior subscapular nerve arises from the posterior cord (fifth and sixth cervical ventral rami). It supplies the lower part of subscapularis and ends in teres major, which is sometimes supplied by a separate branch.</div></section><section><a id="s1120"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0880">Thoracodorsal nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1330">The thoracodorsal nerve arises from the posterior cord (sixth, seventh and eighth cervical ventral rami) between the subscapular nerves. It accompanies the subscapular artery along the posterior axillary wall and supplies latissimus dorsi, reaching its distal border (see <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0150">Fig. 49.29</a>). The muscles, joints and skin of the upper limb are innervated by the fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth cervical ventral rami and nearly all of the first thoracic ventral ramus, collectively forming the brachial plexus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000483/B9780702077050000483.xhtml#f0045">Figs 48.6</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000483/B9780702077050000483.xhtml#f0355">48.7</a>). A branch from the fourth and fifth cervical rami, which contributes to the innervation of the glenohumeral and elbow flexor muscles, is seen occasionally at operation: a muscular contribution from the second thoracic ventral ramus is rare. The rami enter the posterior triangle of the neck between scalenus anterior and medius. Rami from the seventh and eighth cervical ventral rami are the largest (C8 contains about 30,000 myelinated axons) and those from the fifth cervical ventral ramus and the first thoracic ventral ramus are the smallest (between 15,000 and 20,000 myelinated axons). An adult brachial plexus contains between 120,000 and 150,000 myelinated axons, of which 25% innervate the shoulder girdle and glenohumeral joint. The proportion of motor fibres is greatest in the fifth and eighth cervical ventral rami; the sensory contribution is greatest in the seventh cervical ventral ramus. A complex interchange of branches, before the main nerves of the upper limb are formed, produces the trunks, divisions and cords of the brachial plexus.</div></section>


<section><a id="s1125"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0885">Dorsal scapular nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1335">The dorsal scapular nerve arises above the clavicle from the proximal segment of the fifth cervical ventral ramus. It passes posteriorly, piercing scalenus medius, to run down in the plane between levator scapulae and serratus posterior superior and the posterior scalene muscles. It continues along the anterior border of the rhomboid muscles about 1.5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm medial to the vertebral border of the scapula and is closely related to the dorsal scapular artery. The dorsal scapular nerve innervates the rhomboid muscles and, together with branches from the third and fourth cervical ventral rami, it supplies levator scapulae.</div></section><section><a id="s1130"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0890">Long thoracic nerve (nerve to serratus anterior)</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1340">The long thoracic nerve is formed by branches that arise above the clavicle from the proximal segments of the ventral rami of the fifth, sixth and seventh cervical ventral rami. It innervates serratus anterior, a muscle that is essential for the function of the thoracoscapular joint. The muscular branches from the rami join deep to scalenus medius, and the trunk passes down posterolateral to the muscle, on the floor of the posterior triangle deep to the suprascapular nerve. The branches from the fifth and sixth cervical ventral rami are the largest. The nerve follows a sinuous course deep to the investing fascia covering the anterior faces of the digitations of serratus anterior. It is accompanied here by a branch of the thoracodorsal artery, and inclines posterolaterally towards the mid-axillary line.</div><div class="text" id="p1345">The long thoracic nerve is frequently injured during operations around the first rib, in the posterior triangle and in the axilla, and by misplaced intercostal drains. It is particularly susceptible to involvement in neuralgic amyotrophy. Serratus palsy is usual in preganglionic injury to the ventral rami of the fifth, sixth and seventh cervical ventral rami. Pain and loss of function are usual and are only slightly less than those seen after accessory nerve palsy. The signs are characteristic. The active ISHA is, on average, 130°; this is the only nerve lesion in which the active ISHA actually exceeds the total range of active abduction. The scapula is pulled upwards and towards the spine by the unopposed action of trapezius (see <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0225">Fig. 49.39</a>), an action that is increased by the weight of the limb, which contributes to the winging and is most notable in protraction.</div></section><section><a id="s1135"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0895">Axillary (circumflex) nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1350">The axillary nerve arises from the posterior cord (fifth and sixth cervical ventral rami) (see <a href="../B9780702077050000483/B9780702077050000483.xhtml#f0060">Figs 48.8</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0170">49.33</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0180">49.35</a>) and innervates teres minor and deltoid, and the skin overlying deltoid on the lateral aspect of the shoulder. Initially it is lateral to the radial nerve, posterior to the axillary artery and anterior to subscapularis. At the lower border of subscapularis, it curves back inferior to the humeroscapular articular capsule and, together with the posterior circumflex humeral vessels, traverses a quadrangular space bounded above by subscapularis (anteriorly) and teres minor (posteriorly), below by teres major, medially by the long head of triceps, and laterally by the surgical neck of the humerus. It divides in the space into anterior and posterior branches. The anterior branch curves round the neck of the humerus with the posterior circumflex humeral vessels, deep to deltoid, to reach the anterior part of the muscle. At the level of the anterior border of the acromion, the nerve often consists of two or more thin filaments that supply the anterior deltoid; it gives off a few small cutaneous branches that pierce deltoid and ramify in the skin over its lower part. The posterior branch courses medially and posteriorly along the attachment of the lateral head of triceps, inferior to the glenoid rim. It usually lies medial to the anterior branch in the quadrangular space. It gives off the nerve to teres minor and the upper lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm at the lateral edge of the attachment of the long head of triceps. The nerve to teres minor enters the muscle on its inferior surface. The posterior branch frequently supplies the posterior aspect of deltoid, usually via a separate branch from the main stem, but occasionally from the superior lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm. However, the posterior part of deltoid has a more consistent supply from the anterior branch of the axillary nerve, which should be remembered when performing a posterior deltoid-splitting approach to the shoulder. The upper lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm pierces the deep fascia at the medial border of the posterior aspect of deltoid, and supplies the <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E36" id="pagebreak_1.464E36"/><a id="pg1464.e34"/>skin over the lower part of deltoid and the upper part of the long head of triceps. The posterior branch is intimately related to the inferior aspects of the glenoid and shoulder joint capsule. There is often an enlargement or pseudoganglion on the branch to teres minor. The axillary trunk supplies a branch to the shoulder joint below subscapularis.</div><section><a id="s1140"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0900">Lesions of the axillary nerve</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1355">The axillary nerve innervates deltoid. Although a good range of elevation is usually maintained by an intact abductor mechanism, strength and stamina are greatly reduced. Early diagnosis of rupture of the axillary nerve can prove difficult; the nerve is deeply seated, which means that Tinel’s sign is rarely detectable. Active movement is restricted by pain and by the restraint of any sling. The loss of sensation varies and there may not be complete anaesthesia. Patients with an intact suprascapular nerve and an intact rotator cuff are able to initiate abduction and many can fully elevate the arm, or nearly so. The power of forward flexion and of abduction is reduced to, at most, 30–40% of normal, whereas extension, with the shoulder at 90° of abduction, is 10% or less. One useful test is to palpate the posterior third of deltoid with the fingers and ask the patient to move the elbow gently backwards. It should be possible to detect activity in the muscle when the arm is supported in a sling or by the examiner’s arm.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1145"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0905">Musculocutaneous nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1360">The musculocutaneous nerve (fifth, sixth and seventh cervical ventral rami) is one of the two terminal branches of the lateral cord, the other being the lateral root of the median nerve (see <a href="../B9780702077050000483/B9780702077050000483.xhtml#f0085">Fig. 48.13</a>). This division usually occurs at the level of the third part of axillary artery, where the lateral cord lies lateral to the vessel, but it may occur more proximally, where the cord is anterior to the second part of the artery. The nerve may also arise as two or three branches from the cord, or even from the median nerve. It pierces coracobrachialis a variable distance below the tip of the coracoid process and then descends laterally between biceps brachii and brachialis to the lateral side of the arm. The first branch, to coracobrachialis, may pass into the muscle no more than 2<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm distal to the tip of the coracoid; fibres from C7 may branch directly from the lateral cord. Branches to biceps brachii and brachialis leave after the musculocutaneous nerve has pierced coracobrachialis. There are usually two branches to brachialis, and the lower branch also supplies the anterior aspect of the elbow joint. The nerve to biceps brachii is consistently accompanied by a vascular pedicle. The nerve now inclines lateral and deep, into the plane between brachialis posteriorly and biceps anteriorly, where it supplies a small branch to the humerus that enters the shaft with the nutrient artery. Below the branches to brachialis, the musculocutaneous nerve continues as the lateral cutaneous nerve of the forearm, deep to biceps, before emerging lateral to it about 11<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm above the lateral epicondyle, and then running down the lateral aspect of the forearm.</div><div class="text" id="p1365">The musculocutaneous nerve has frequent variations. It may run behind coracobrachialis or adhere for some distance to the median nerve and pass behind biceps brachii. Some fibres of the median nerve may run in the musculocutaneous nerve, leaving it to join their proper trunk; less frequently, the reverse occurs, and the median nerve sends a branch to the musculocutaneous nerve. Occasionally, the musculocutaneous nerve also supplies pronator teres and may innervate the skin over the first metacarpal and the lateral part of the thenar eminence.</div></section><section><a id="s1150"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0910">Lateral cutaneous nerve of the forearm</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1370">The lateral cutaneous nerve of the forearm is the cutaneous division of the musculocutaneous nerve. It lies between biceps brachii and brachialis, inclining from the medial to the lateral side, then passes through the cubital fossa lateral to the tendon of biceps brachii and deep to the cephalic vein and descends along the radial border of the forearm to the wrist (see <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0170">Figs 49.33</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0175">49.34</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0170">50.31</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0175">50.32</a>). It supplies the skin of the anterolateral surface of the forearm (see <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495.xhtml#f0010">Fig. 49.1</a>) and connects with the posterior cutaneous nerve of the forearm and the terminal branch of the radial nerve by branches that pass around the radial border of the forearm. Its trunk gives rise to a slender recurrent branch that extends along the cephalic vein as far as the middle third of the upper arm, distributing filaments to the skin over the distal third of the anterolateral surface of the upper arm close to the vein. At the wrist joint, the lateral cutaneous nerve of the forearm is anterior to the radial artery. It gives off filaments that pierce the deep fascia and accompany the artery to the dorsum of the carpus. The nerve then passes to the base of the thenar eminence, where it ends in cutaneous rami, some of which connect with the terminal branch of the radial nerve and the palmar cutaneous branch of the median nerve.</div></section><section><a id="s1155"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0915">Medial cutaneous nerve of the arm</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1375">The medial cutaneous nerve of the arm (eighth cervical ventral ramus and first thoracic ventral ramus) is the smallest and most medial branch of the brachial plexus, arising from the medial cord (see <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0180">Fig. 49.35</a>). It crosses the axilla, either anterior or posterior to the axillary vein, then passes medial to the axillary vein, communicates with the intercostobrachial nerve, and descends medial to the brachial artery and basilic vein. It pierces the deep fascia at the midpoint of the upper arm to supply the skin over the medial aspect of the distal third of the upper arm (see <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0175">Fig. 49.34</a>). It connects with the posterior branch of the medial cutaneous nerve of the forearm. Sometimes, the medial cutaneous nerve of the arm and the intercostobrachial nerve are connected in a plexiform manner in the axilla. The intercostobrachial nerve may be large and reinforced by part of the lateral cutaneous branch of the third intercostal nerve. In these cases, it replaces the medial cutaneous nerve of the arm and receives a connection representing the latter from the brachial plexus (occasionally, this connection is absent).</div></section><section><a id="s1160"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0920">Medial cutaneous nerve of the forearm</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1380">The medial cutaneous nerve of the forearm comes from the medial cord (first thoracic ventral ramus) (see <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0175">Fig. 49.34</a>). It lies initially between the axillary artery and vein, and gives off a ramus that pierces the deep fascia to supply the skin over the biceps, almost to the elbow. The nerve descends medial to the brachial artery, pierces the deep fascia with the basilic vein midway in the arm, and divides into anterior and posterior branches before it enters the forearm (see <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0175">Figs 49.34</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0170">50.31</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0180">50.32</a>). The larger anterior branch usually passes anterior to, or occasionally behind, the median cubital vein, and descends anteromedially in the forearm to supply the skin as far as the wrist. It curves round to the dorsum of the forearm, descending on its medial border to the wrist, supplying the skin (see <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0010">Fig. 50.1</a>). It connects with the medial cutaneous nerve of the arm, the posterior cutaneous nerve of the forearm and the dorsal branch of the ulnar nerve.</div></section></section><section><a id="s9165"/><section><a id="s1165"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0925">Ulnar nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1385">The ulnar nerve (seventh and eighth cervical ventral rami and first thoracic ventral ramus) is the continuation of the medial cord (see <a href="../B9780702077050000483/B9780702077050000483.xhtml#f0050">Fig. 48.12</a>). It usually has no branches in the arm, but occasionally may give a branch to the medial head of triceps. The nerve runs distally through the axilla, medial to the axillary artery and between it and the vein, and continues distally medial to the brachial artery as far as the mid-arm. Here it inclines posteromedially to perforate the medial intermuscular septum about 10<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm proximal to the medial epicondyle and passes through a fibrous canal, the arcade of Struthers, which is between 5 and 6<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm long. The walls of the canal include the medial intermuscular septum and the fascial sheath which invests the medial head of triceps brachii. The nerve passes behind the medial epicondyle in a groove where it is easily palpable (see <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0155">Fig. 50.29</a>) and runs through the cubital tunnel, between the capsule of the humero-ulnar joint and the overlying arcuate ligament of Osborne (joining the two heads of flexor carpi ulnaris). It gives off articular branches to the elbow as it lies between the medial epicondyle and the olecranon. The ulnar nerve enters the forearm between the two heads of flexor carpi ulnaris, which it supplies by two neurovascular pedicles, the first arising just distal to the cubital tunnel and the second about one-quarter of the way down the forearm: it is superficial to the posterior and oblique parts of the ulnar collateral ligament and deep to the tough deep fascia of flexor carpi ulnaris (Osborne’s fascia). The nerve descends on the medial side of the forearm on flexor digitorum profundus, to which it sends several branches (see <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0180">Fig. 50.32</a>). Proximally, it runs with the ulnar vessels in a well-defined sheath deep to the anterior margin of flexor carpi ulnaris; distally, it lies lateral to the muscle and is covered only by skin and fasciae. In the upper third of the forearm, the ulnar nerve is distant from the ulnar artery but it comes to lie close to the medial side of the artery more distally. Some 5–6<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm proximal to the ulnar styloid it gives off the dorsal cutaneous branch which winds around the ulna, at first deep to flexor carpi ulnaris, and then subcutaneously, and innervates the skin of the dorsum of the hand and little finger, and the medial side of the ring finger. At the wrist the ulnar nerve passes under the superficial part of the flexor retinaculum (in Guyon’s canal) with the ulnar artery and divides into superficial and deep branches (see <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513.xhtml#f0175">Fig. 51.10</a>). The superficial division innervates the skin of the medial two digits and palmaris brevis. The deep branch passes, with the deep branch of the ulnar artery, between abductor and flexor digiti minimi, pierces opponens digiti minimi and then runs across the deep palmar space with the deep palmar arch. It innervates all the muscles of the hand, except for the first and second (index and middle) lumbricals, abductor pollicis brevis, opponens pollicis and part of flexor pollicis brevis.</div><div class="text" id="p1390">The ulnar nerve is accompanied by the superior collateral ulnar vessels in the lower third of the arm as far as the entrance to the cubital tunnel, and then by the posteroinferior ulnar collateral vessels. The anastomosis between these vessels permits the use of most of the ulnar <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E37" id="pagebreak_1.464E37"/><a id="pg1464.e35"/>nerve as a free vascularized graft, in cases where the parent roots, the seventh and eighth cervical ventral rami and the first thoracic ventral ramus, are irreparable.. The ulnar nerve is palpable in the lower arm and behind the medial epicondyle, where it is subcutaneous. There is an important relation here: a posterior branch of the medial cutaneous nerve of the forearm sweeps across the cubital tunnel and gets in the way of medial surgical exposures. Inadvertent injury may cause severe pain. The ulnar nerve is palpable at the wrist where it emerges from under flexor carpi ulnaris. The dorsal cutaneous branch can be palpated in those of slender physique where it crosses the subcutaneous ulna.</div><section><a id="s1175"/><section><a id="s1180"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0930">Muscular branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p1395">There are two main muscular branches of the ulnar nerve in the forearm. They arise near the elbow and supply flexor carpi ulnaris and the medial half of flexor digitorum profundus.</div></section><section><a id="s1185"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0935">Dorsal branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p1400">The dorsal branch arises approximately 5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm proximal to the wrist (see <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513.xhtml#f0045">Fig. 51.9</a>). It passes distally and dorsally, deep to flexor carpi ulnaris, perforates the deep fascia, descends along the medial side of the dorsum of the wrist and hand, and then divides into two, or often three, dorsal digital nerves. The first supplies the medial side of the little finger; the second, the adjacent sides of the little and ring fingers; while the third, when present, supplies adjoining sides of the ring and middle fingers. The latter may be replaced, wholly or partially, by a branch of the radial nerve, which communicates with it on the dorsum of the hand. In the little finger, the dorsal digital nerves extend only to the base of the distal phalanx; in the ring finger, they extend only to the base of the middle phalanx. The most distal parts of the little finger and of the ulnar side of the ring finger are supplied by dorsal branches of the proper palmar digital branches of the ulnar nerve. The most distal part of the lateral side of the ring finger is supplied by dorsal branches of the proper palmar digital branch of the median nerve.</div></section><section><a id="s1190"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0940">Superficial terminal branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p1405">The superficial terminal branch supplies palmaris brevis and the medial palmar skin. It divides into two palmar digital nerves. One supplies the medial side of the little finger; the other (a common palmar digital nerve) sends a branch to the median nerve and divides into two proper digital nerves to supply the adjoining sides of little and ring fingers. The proper digital branches within the digit are distributed like those derived from the median nerve.</div></section><section><a id="s1195"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0945">Deep terminal branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p1410">The deep terminal branch accompanies the deep branch of the ulnar artery as it passes between abductor digiti minimi and flexor digiti minimi, and then perforates opponens digiti minimi to follow the deep palmar arch dorsal to the flexor tendons. At its origin, it supplies the three short muscles of the little finger. As it crosses the hand, it supplies the interossei and the third and fourth lumbricals. It ends by supplying adductor pollicis, the first dorsal interosseous and, usually, flexor pollicis brevis.</div><div class="text" id="p1415">The medial part of flexor digitorum profundus is supplied by the ulnar nerve, as are the third and fourth lumbricals, which are connected with the tendons of this part of the muscle. Similarly, the lateral part of flexor digitorum profundus and the first and second lumbricals are supplied by the median nerve. The third lumbrical is often supplied by both nerves. The deep terminal branch gives branches to some intercarpal, carpometacarpal and intermetacarpal joints; precise details are uncertain. Vasomotor branches, arising in the forearm and hand, supply the ulnar and palmar arteries.</div></section><section><a id="s1200"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0950">Palmar cutaneous branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p1420">The palmar cutaneous branch of the ulnar nerve arises in mid-forearm, descends on the ulnar artery, which it supplies, and then perforates the deep fascia. It communicates with the palmar branch of the median nerve and ends in the palmar skin. It sometimes supplies palmaris brevis.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1205"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0955">Lesions of the ulnar nerve</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1425">The ulnar nerve is a mixed nerve and so patients may present with sensory or motor symptoms or a combination of the two, sometimes with additional physical signs of autonomic disturbance. There may be tenderness and a positive Tinel’s sign over the nerve at the point of compression. Numbness and paraesthesiae occur early, followed, in more severe cases, by weakness of power grip and, ultimately, atrophy of the lumbricals and interossei with clawing of ring and little fingers.</div><div class="text" id="p1430">The ulnar nerve may be compressed by the arcade of Struthers at the level of the medial intermuscular septum; at the level of the flexor/pronator aponeurosis as it enters the forearm between the heads of flexor carpi ulnaris; or deep to the deep fascia of flexor carpi ulnaris which exhibits tough condensations extending up to 9<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm from the medial epicondyle (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib111" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_111">Siemionow et al 2007</a>). The nerve is most often compressed at the level of the cubital tunnel by the Osborne’s arcuate ligament; this is the most common nerve compression syndrome after that of the median nerve in the carpal tunnel.</div><div class="text" id="p1435">The cross-sectional area of the cubital tunnel has been shown to narrow by almost 55% in full flexion. Ultrasound studies have suggested that the ratio of the cross-sectional area of radial nerve<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>:<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cubital tunnel is most strongly linked to reduced conduction velocity (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib138" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_138">Yoon et al 2007</a>). Combining elbow flexion with direct pressure over the cubital tunnel for 60 seconds will elicit symptoms in most affected patients (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib85" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_85">Novak et al 1994</a>). Other contributory factors are previous trauma, especially supracondylar and medial epicondyle fractures in childhood, valgus instability of the elbow in athletes involved in throwing sports, and degenerative disease.</div><div class="text" id="p1440">The most reliable treatment for patients who fail to respond to non-surgical remedies is a simple release of the cubital tunnel. The release should be complete and include release of Osborne’s ligament and the deep fascia of flexor carpi ulnaris; care should be taken to avoid damage to branches of the medial cutaneous nerve of the forearm that usually cross the line of incision approximately 2<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span> cm above the medial epicondyle and a mean 3.1<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm distal to the medial epicondyle in all patients (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib66" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_66">Lowe et al 2004</a>). Anconeus epitrochlearis should be excised if present because it is a potential cause for recurrent symptoms. The ulnar nerve should not be circumferentially denuded of its retinaculum because this contains its intrinsic blood supply. Transposition of the nerve should be reserved for cases of persistent subluxation or of failure of a simple release to achieve symptomatic relief. This is relatively unusual and is said to occur in only 7% of cases.</div><div class="text" id="p1445">The ulnar nerve can be compressed as it passes through Guyon’s canal at the wrist. Causes of compression at this site include a ganglion from the piso-triquetral joint, prolonged compression from a cyclist’s handlebars, hook of hamate fracture, and proximity of aberrant or accessory muscles. The symptoms depend on the precise level at which the ulnar nerve and its branches are compressed. Altered sensation is noted in the palmar aspect of the little finger and ulnar half of the ring finger; sensation on the ulnar aspect of the dorsum of the hand is normal due to preservation of the dorsal cutaneous branch. If the motor branch fibres are affected, there is weakness and wasting of the intrinsic muscles of the hand supplied by the ulnar nerve, with clawing posture in severe compression. Weakness of adductor pollicis and first dorsal interosseous substantially degrades pinch strength; if a slip of paper is held in the key pinch position between the pulp of the thumb and the radial side of the index proximal interphalangeal joint, the tip of the thumb involuntarily flexes as flexor pollicis longus contracts to compensate for the absent adductor pollicis and first dorsal interosseous (Froment’s sign). Surgical treatment involves decompression of the nerve by division of the roof of Guyon’s canal and removal of any causative lesion, such as a ganglion. Ulnar tunnel syndrome can be difficult to distinguish from more proximal causes of ulnar nerve compression, of which the most common is entrapment of the nerve in the cubital canal at the elbow. In this condition, sensory changes would include the dorso-ulnar aspect of the hand and motor changes would involve flexor carpi ulnaris and flexor digitorum profundus to the little and ring fingers. Clawing is less apparent with a more proximal failure of the ulnar nerve (the ‘ulnar paradox’) because flexor digitorum profundus also fails so there is less flexion force to expose the absent extensor moment of the paralysed intrinsics. In the absence of obvious clinical indicators, an unpleasant tingling sensation (Tinel’s sign) over the site of compression, electrophysiological studies and MRI scans may aid diagnosis.</div><div class="text" id="p1450">Ulnar nerve division at the wrist paralyses all the intrinsic muscles of the hand (apart from the radial two lumbricals, abductor pollicis brevis, and part of flexor pollicis brevis and opponens pollicis). The intrinsic muscle action of flexing the metacarpophalangeal joint and extending the interphalangeal joints is lost. The unopposed action of the long extensors and flexors of the fingers cause clawing, with extension of the metacarpophalangeal joints and flexion of the interphalangeal joints. The clawing is less intense in the index and middle fingers because their lumbricals are supplied by the median nerve. There is sensory loss over the little finger and the ulnar half of the ring finger. The skin over the ulnar aspect of the dorsum of the hand is spared because the dorsal branch of the ulnar nerve is given off approximately 5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm proximal to the wrist joint. A combined median and ulnar nerve palsy at the wrist results in a full claw hand with thenar and hypothenar flattening and thumb adduction and flexion (a simian hand).</div></section></section><section><a id="s1210"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0960">Median nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1455">The median nerve is formed by the union of the lateral root from the lateral cord (sixth and seventh cervical ventral rami), and the medial <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E38" id="pagebreak_1.464E38"/><a id="pg1464.e36"/>root from the medial cord (eighth cervical and first thoracic ventral rami), which meet anterior or lateral to the third part of the axillary artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000483/B9780702077050000483.xhtml#f0355">Figs 48.7</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000483/B9780702077050000483.xhtml#f0070">48.10</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0150">49.29</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0180">49.35</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0185">49.44</a>). Some fibres from C7 often leave the lateral root in the lower part of the axilla, pass distomedially posterior to the medial root, and usually anterior to the axillary artery, to join the ulnar nerve. Clinically, they are believed to be mainly motor and to supply flexor carpi ulnaris. If the lateral root is small, the musculocutaneous nerve (fifth, sixth and seventh cervical ventral rami) connects with the median nerve in the arm.</div><div class="text" id="p1460">The first branch of the median nerve, to pronator teres, arises 2–3<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm above the medial epicondyle. A second branch, or leash of branches, arises at the level of the tip of the medial epicondyle and innervates palmaris longus, flexor carpi radialis and flexor digitorum superficialis. In the cubital fossa, the median nerve lies medial to the brachial artery, deep to the bicipital aponeurosis and anterior to brachialis. It usually enters the forearm between the heads of pronator teres, although, occasionally, it may pass posterior to both heads of the muscle, or it may pass through its humeral head (see <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0170">Fig. 50.31</a>; see also <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0115">Figs 50.21</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0120">50.22</a>). The nerve crosses to the lateral side of the ulnar artery, from which it is separated by the deep head of pronator teres, passes behind a tendinous bridge between the humero-ulnar and radial heads of flexor digitorum superficialis, and descends through the forearm posterior and adherent to flexor digitorum superficialis and anterior to flexor digitorum profundus. Just proximal to the tendinous arcade of flexor digitorum superficialis, the median nerve gives off the anterior interosseous nerve. Accompanied by the anterior interosseous vessels, this large branch dives deeply to pass down along the interosseous membrane and supplies flexor pollicis longus, the radial half of flexor digitorum profundus and pronator quadratus. There is no cutaneous distribution.</div><div class="text" id="p1465">The main nerve continues in the plane between the superficial and deep digital flexors, supplying two or three branches to the former. About 5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm proximal to the flexor retinaculum, the median nerve emerges from behind the lateral edge of flexor digitorum superficialis and becomes superficial just proximal to the wrist. Just proximal to the flexor retinaculum the median nerve is lateral and superficial to the tendons of flexor digitorum superficialis and lies between the tendons of flexor carpi radialis and palmaris longus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0170">Fig. 50.31</a>). It passes under the retinaculum in the ‘carpal tunnel’, where it may be compressed in carpal tunnel syndrome, and enters the palm. Distal to the retinaculum, the nerve enlarges and flattens, and usually divides into five or six branches; the mode and level of division are variable. The recurrent (motor) nerve to the thenar muscles arises within, or just distal to, the carpal tunnel, usually on the lateral side of the main nerve. The palmar digital nerves are formed within the palm of the hand and pass distally, deep to the superficial palmar arch and its digital vessels, at first anterior to the tendons of the long flexors, to supply the palmar skin of the thumb, index and middle fingers and the lateral side of the ring finger. The palmar cutaneous branch arises 3.5–6<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm proximal to the most proximal wrist crease, and passes lateral to the main nerve and superficial to the flexor retinaculum to innervate the skin of the proximal palm.</div><div class="text" id="p1470">Within the carpal tunnel and hand, the median nerve has been shown to glide by up to 3<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm, depending on the position of the elbow and the attitude of the forearm in pronation or supination (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib31" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_31">Echigo et al 2008</a>). The greatest longitudinal excursion of the median nerve (15.5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm) is seen just proximal to the carpal tunnel; similar excursion of the ulnar nerve has been recorded as 14.8<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm in cadavers (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib136" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_136">Wilgis and Murphy 1986</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p1475">The median nerve is palpable along its course in the arm, where it is covered by deep fascia and skin, after emerging from deep to coracobrachialis; on the flexor aspect of the elbow, deep to the bicipital aponeurosis; and at the wrist where it emerges from behind the superficial flexor tendons, just lateral to palmaris longus. It is closely related to the brachial artery in the anterior aspect of the elbow, where it courses anterior to brachialis and medial to the artery.</div><div class="text" id="p1480">The median nerve has muscular, anterior interosseous, palmar cutaneous and palmar digital branches.</div><section><a id="s1215"/><section><a id="s1220"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0965">Muscular branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p1485">Muscular branches are given off near the elbow to all the superficial flexor muscles except flexor carpi ulnaris. The branch to the part of flexor digitorum superficialis that serves the index finger is given off near the mid-forearm and may be derived from the anterior interosseous nerve.</div></section><section><a id="s1225"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0970">Anterior interosseous nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p1490">The anterior interosseous nerve arises from the posterior aspect of the median nerve between the two heads of pronator teres, just distal to the branches to the superficial forearm flexors and proximal tendinous arch of flexor digitorum superficialis (see <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0055">Figs 50.10</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0120">50.22</a>). It descends with the anterior interosseous artery anterior to the interosseous membrane, between and deep to flexor pollicis longus and flexor digitorum profundus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0180">Fig. 50.32</a>), supplying flexor pollicis longus and the lateral part of flexor digitorum profundus (to the index and middle fingers). Terminally, the anterior interosseous nerve lies posterior to pronator quadratus, which it supplies via its deep surface. It also supplies articular branches to the distal radio-ulnar, radiocarpal and carpal joints.</div></section><section><a id="s1230"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0975">Palmar cutaneous branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p1495">The palmar cutaneous branch emerges from the radial side of the median nerve 3.5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm to 6<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm proximal to the flexor retinaculum. It runs in a small tunnel alongside the ulnar edge of the sheath of flexor carpi radialis, radial and deep to palmaris longus, before piercing the deep fascia to enter the palm either through or superficial to the flexor retinaculum (see <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513_split_a.xhtml#f0120">Fig. 51.27B</a>). It usually ends in medial and lateral terminal branches that supply a patch of skin over and just beyond the anterior surface of the palm overlying the scaphoid tubercle and anterior aspect of the carpometacarpal joint of the thumb (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib44" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_44">Hobbs et al 1990</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513_bib.xhtml#bib25" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_25">da Silva et al 1996</a>). The lateral branches connect with the lateral cutaneous nerve of the forearm and the medial branches connect with the palmar cutaneous branch of the ulnar nerve (see <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513_split_a.xhtml#f0120">Fig. 51.27B</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s1235"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0980">Muscular branch (recurrent motor branch)</p><div class="textfl" id="p1500">The recurrent motor branch is short and thick, and arises from the lateral side of the nerve; it may be the first palmar branch or a terminal branch that arises level with the digital branches. It runs laterally, just distal to the flexor retinaculum and with a slight recurrent curve beneath the part of the palmar aponeurosis covering the thenar muscles (see <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513_split_a.xhtml#f0120">Fig. 51.27B</a>). It turns round the distal border of the retinaculum to lie superficial to flexor pollicis brevis, which it usually supplies, and either continues superficial to the muscle or traverses it. It gives a branch to abductor pollicis brevis that enters the medial edge of the muscle, and then passes deep to it to supply opponens pollicis, entering its medial edge. Its terminal part occasionally gives a branch to the first dorsal interosseous, and may be its sole or partial supply. The muscular branch may arise in the carpal tunnel and pierce the flexor retinaculum. Anomalies of the median nerve occur in approximately 10% of patients undergoing a carpal tunnel release. These branches usually arise from the ulnar side of the nerve and may be motor or sensory.</div></section><section><a id="s1240"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0985">Palmar digital branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p1505">The median nerve supplies palmar cutaneous digital branches to the radial three and a half digits (thumb, index, middle and the lateral side of the ring); sometimes, the radial side of the ring finger is supplied by the ulnar nerve. Occasionally, there is a communicating branch between the common digital nerve to the middle and ring fingers (derived from the median nerve) and the common digital nerve to the ring and little fingers (derived from the ulnar nerve); this may explain variations in sensory patterns that do not conform to the classic pattern.</div><div class="text" id="p1510">Various patterns of termination of the palmar digital nerves have been described: the branches are commonly arranged as follows. Distal to the flexor retinaculum, the median nerve splits into a smaller lateral portion and a larger medial portion. The lateral portion gives rise to a recurrent motor branch and divides into three proper digital nerves that supply the thumb and radial index finger. The branch that supplies the radial side of the index finger also supplies the first lumbrical. The medial portion divides into two common palmar digital nerves which each further divide into two proper digital nerves that supply the adjacent sides of the index, middle and ring fingers. The lateral common digital nerve supplies the second lumbrical, and the medial receives a communicating twig from the common palmar digital branch of the ulnar nerve and may supply the third lumbrical. In the distal part of the palm, the digital arteries pass deeply between the divisions of the digital nerves; the nerves lie anterior to the arteries on the sides of the digits.</div><div class="text" id="p1515">The digital nerves pass distally, deep to the superficial palmar arch and its digital vessels, at first anterior to the tendons of the long flexors. Together with the lumbricals and palmar digital arteries, they pass dorsal to the superficial transverse metacarpal ligament and ventral to the deep transverse metacarpal ligament. In the digits, the nerves run distally beside the long flexor tendons (outside their fibrous sheaths), level with the anterior phalangeal surfaces and anterior to the digital arteries, between Grayson’s and Cleland’s ligaments. Each nerve gives off several branches to the skin on the volar and lateral aspects of the digit and sends branches to the metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joints.</div><div class="text" id="p1520">The digital nerves supply the fibrous sheaths of the long flexor tendons, blood vessels (vasomotor) and sweat glands (sudomotor). <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E39" id="pagebreak_1.464E39"/><a id="pg1464.e37"/>Distal to the base of the distal phalanx, each digital nerve gives off a branch that passes dorsally to the nail bed (see <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513.xhtml#f0045">Fig. 51.9</a>). The main nerve frequently trifurcates to supply the pulp and skin of the terminal part of the digit. Distal to the base of the proximal phalanx, each proper digital nerve also gives off a dorsal branch to supply the skin over the dorsum of the middle and distal phalanges. The proper palmar digital nerves to the thumb and the lateral side of the index finger emerge with the tendons of the long flexors from under the lateral edge of the palmar aponeurosis. They are arranged in the digits as described above, except that, in the thumb, small distal branches supply the skin on the dorsum of the distal phalanx only.</div></section><section><a id="s1245"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0990">Other branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p1525">In addition to the branches of the median nerve described above, variable vasomotor branches supply the radial and ulnar arteries and their branches. Some of the intercarpal, carpometacarpal and intermetacarpal joints are said to be supplied by the median nerve or its anterior interosseous branch; the precise details are uncertain.</div></section></section></section></section></section>



<section><a id="s1250"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0995">Martin–Gruber nerve connection</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1530">A motor communicating branch between the median and ulnar nerves in the forearm occurs in approximately one-quarter of patients. The most common variant has a branch passing from the anterior interosseous to the ulnar nerve. A number of patterns have been described where branches pass between flexors digitorum superficialis and profundus, deep to the ulnar artery, to join the ulnar nerve; such branches may explain the variations in innervation of the intrinsic muscles.</div></section><section><a id="s1255"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1000">Lesions of the median nerve</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1535">The median nerve may be compressed at four sites in the elbow and forearm. The most proximal is the ligament of Struthers, where, if the median nerve is accompanied by the brachial artery, vascular symptoms and signs may also be present. More distally, it may become entrapped by a thickened bicipital aponeurosis. The other sites of compression are between the superficial and deep heads of pronator teres, and the proximal fibrous arch of flexor digitorum superficialis.</div><div class="text" id="p1540">Median nerve division at the wrist leads to paralysis of the lumbricals to the index and middle fingers and of the thenar muscles (apart from flexor pollicis brevis and adductor pollicis), as well as loss of sensation to the thumb, index, middle and radial half of the ring fingers. The thenar muscles waste, and the adductor pollicis, which is no longer antagonized by flexor pollicis brevis and opponens pollicis, produces an adducted posture of the thumb. Division of the median nerve distal to the origin of its palmar cutaneous branch, which arises somewhere between 3.5 and 6<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm proximal to the proximal edge of the flexor retinaculum and the distal transverse wrist crease, will leave the branch intact to supply the skin over the thenar eminence and radial side of the proximal part of the hand. Careful clinical examination of the sensibility of the skin in this region should help to clarify the level of the lesion. High division of the nerve will, as with compressive lesions at this level, result in weakness of pronation of the forearm, radial flexion of the wrist and the lateral two fingers.</div><div class="text" id="p1545">Patients essentially present with one of two syndromes. The anterior interosseous nerve syndrome presents as a failure of pinch grip due to weakness of flexor pollicis longus and the radial portion of flexor or digitorum profundus. This reduces the flexion power of the interphalangeal joint of the thumb and the distal interphalangeal joint of the index finger. The pronator syndrome presents with symptoms and signs that mimic carpal tunnel syndrome. Patients present with pain and altered sensation in the radial three and a half fingers of the hand that are aggravated by activity. However, a Tinel’s sign will be positive over the proximal forearm, and sensation over the thenar eminence may be diminished, because the palmar cutaneous branch of the nerve arises above the carpal tunnel. The clinical presentation may vary in the presence of a Martin–Gruber anastomosis (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib99" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_99">Rodriguez-Niedenführ et al 2002</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p1550">Most patients will respond to non-operative treatment but those who fail to do so usually respond well to surgical decompression. Exploration and decompression should address all the potential areas of compression.</div></section><section><a id="s7260"/><section><a id="s1260"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1005">Carpal tunnel syndrome</p><div class="textfl" id="p1555">Carpal tunnel syndrome is the most common entrapment mononeuropathy. It is caused by compression of the median nerve as it passes through the fibro-osseous tunnel beneath the flexor retinaculum (see <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513_split_a.xhtml#f0200">Fig. 51.38</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p1560">Carpal tunnel syndrome is usually idiopathic, however, certain diagnoses may predispose to the condition. The carpal tunnel may be narrowed by arthritic changes in the wrist joint, by thickening of the synovium (especially in rheumatoid disease) by soft tissue thickening, as may occur in myxoedema and acromegaly; it is associated with diabetes, oedema, obesity, pregnancy and vibration. The association with repetitive use is controversial and has probably been overestimated. Normally, the median nerve slides smoothly in and out of the carpal tunnel during flexion and extension of the wrist, but when the nerve is compressed this sliding is restricted by traction that aggravates the conduction block. Typically, the syndrome produces painful paraesthesia and numbness in the thumb, index, middle and medial side of the ring fingers, which is worse at night and when performing manoeuvres such as holding a book or telephone. The palmar branch of the median nerve is spared because it does not pass through the carpal tunnel. With time, the compression leads to wasting and weakness of abductor pollicis brevis and loss of sweating in the cutaneous territory of the median nerve, sparing the patch overlying the scaphoid tubercle and palmar side of the carpometacarpal joint which is supplied by the palmar cutaneous nerve. Treatment depends on the cause. If present just at night, due to involuntary flexion of the wrist (which increases pressure in the carpal canal) then a splint may suffice. If the syndrome is of recent onset, especially in association with pregnancy or synovial thickening, then a steroid injection can be curative. For more persistent symptoms, and especially if there is evidence of axonal failure (numbness, loss of sweating, wasting of abductor pollicis brevis) then surgery is recommended. This involves dividing the flexor retinaculum. The most common hazards of decompression are inadequate decompression because of failure to divide the most distal or most proximal part of the flexor retinaculum, damage to the motor branch causing weakness, or palmar cutaneous branch or one or more terminal sensory branches causing scar tenderness and a patch of numbness and damage to the superficial palmar arch causing a haematoma.</div><div class="text" id="p1565">Anatomical anomalies of the median nerve in the carpal tunnel are very common (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib43" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_43">Henry et al 2015</a>) and occur in up to 12% of hands. The most common are variations in the course of the recurrent motor branch in relation to the flexor retinaculum. These may be transligamentous (11.3%), subligamentous (13.5%) or extraligamentous (75.2%). Damage may also occur to the palmar cutaneous branch of the median nerve and to the superficial connections between the median and ulnar nerves (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib71" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_71">Martin et al 1996</a>), (the Berrettini branch, division of which will leave the patient with numbness in the middle and ring fingers). <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib116" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_116">Stancič et al (1999)</a> noted that this connection was present in 81% of dissected hands and proposed that it should be regarded as a normal anatomical finding.</div></section></section>


</body></html>