<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html lang="EN" xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head><meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/><title>Gray's Anatomy</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../Style/Elsevier_eBook.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" media="only screen" href="../../Style/media.css"/></head><body id="sec-s0010"><section><a id="s1265"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1010">Radial nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1570">The radial nerve (fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth cervical and first thoracic ventral rami) is the terminal branch of the posterior cord (see <a href="../B9780702077050000483/B9780702077050000483.xhtml#f0065">Fig. 48.9</a>). It is the largest nerve in the upper limb and the most commonly damaged. Between its origin at the level of the base of the coracoid and its entrance into the spiral groove, where it is accompanied by the profunda brachii artery, the radial nerve is supplied by fewer arteries than elsewhere along its course. The first 8–10<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm of the nerve may not have a nutrient artery and will, therefore, be relatively avascular if the nerve is transected at its origin. The nerve lies closest to the bone where it pierces the lateral intermuscular septum to pass through a short tunnel bounded by bone and unyielding fascia. The nerve is tethered here, a common level of rupture, entrapment or compression.</div><div class="text" id="p1575">The radial nerve descends behind the third part of the axillary artery and the upper part of the brachial artery, anterior to subscapularis above and the tendons of latissimus dorsi and teres major below, giving branches to the medial head of triceps at this level. With the profunda brachii artery, it inclines dorsally, passing through the lower triangular space below the lower border of teres major, between the long head of triceps and the humerus. It then spirals obliquely across the posterior shaft of the humerus, lying posterior to the uppermost fibres of the medial head of triceps, which separate the nerve from the bone in the first part of the spiral groove. The nerve(s) to the lateral head of triceps arise(s) within the spiral groove; that to the lateral head just before the radial nerve re-enters the anterior compartment. Two cutaneous nerves, the lower lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm and the posterior cutaneous nerve of the forearm, pass away from the main nerve in the final part of the spiral groove and course along the anterior face of the lateral head of triceps to perforate the deep fascia about four fingers’ breadths above the lateral epicondyle. They innervate the skin of the lower lateral arm and the posterior aspect of the forearm, respectively. The radial nerve at the elbow lies in the deep groove between brachialis medially and brachioradialis and extensor carpi radialis longus laterally (see <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0115">Fig. 50.21</a>). The nerve to brachioradialis arises about three fingers’ breadths proximal to the lateral epicondyle; the nerve to extensor carpi radialis longus about one finger’s breadth more distal; and the nerve to extensor carpi radialis brevis about one finger’s breadth above the epicondyle. These <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E40" id="pagebreak_1.464E40"/><a id="pg1464.e38"/>branches arise from the main radial nerve as it runs between brachialis anteriorly and brachioradialis posteriorly; the nerve may be palpable at this level. On reaching the lateral side of the humerus, the radial nerve pierces the lateral intermuscular septum to enter the anterior compartment of the arm. At the level of the tip of the lateral epicondyle, the nerve divides into the posterior interosseous and superficial radial nerves. Another branch to extensor carpi radialis brevis is usually given off here. There is some variation in the level at which branches of the radial nerve arise from the main trunk in different individuals. Branches to extensor carpi radialis brevis and supinator may arise from the main trunk of the radial nerve or from the proximal part of the posterior interosseous nerve, but almost invariably above the arcade of Frohse.</div><div class="text" id="p1580">The superficial radial nerve innervates the skin over the dorsum of the radial half of the ring, middle and index fingers, and that of the thumb as far as the distal interphalangeal joint. It often provides important sensation on the skin of the thumb web space and the skin on the adjacent sides of the thumb and index finger.</div><div class="text" id="p1585">The branches of the radial nerve are: muscular, cutaneous, articular, superficial radial and posterior interosseous.</div><section><a id="s1270"/><section><a id="s1275"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1015">Muscular branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p1590">Muscular branches supply triceps, anconeus, brachioradialis, extensor carpi radialis longus and brachialis in medial, posterior and lateral groups. Medial muscular branches arise from the radial nerve on the medial side of the arm and supply the medial and long heads of triceps. The branch to the medial head is a long, slender filament that lies close to the ulnar nerve as far as the distal third of the arm, and is often termed the ulnar collateral nerve. A large posterior muscular branch arises from the nerve as it lies in the humeral groove and divides to supply the medial and lateral heads of triceps and anconeus. The branch to anconeus is a long nerve that descends in the medial head of triceps and partially supplies it; the nerve is accompanied by the middle collateral branch of the profunda brachii artery and passes behind the elbow joint to end in anconeus. Lateral muscular branches arise anterior to the lateral intermuscular septum and supply the lateral part of brachialis, brachioradialis and extensor carpi radialis longus.</div></section><section><a id="s1280"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1020">Cutaneous branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p1595">Cutaneous branches are the posterior and lower lateral cutaneous nerves of the arm and the posterior cutaneous nerve of the forearm.</div><section><a id="s1285"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1025">Posterior cutaneous nerve of the arm</p><div class="textfl" id="p1600">The small posterior cutaneous nerve of the arm arises in the axilla and passes medially to supply the skin on the dorsal surface of the arm nearly as far as the olecranon. It crosses posterior to, and communicates with, the intercostobrachial nerve.</div></section><section><a id="s1290"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1030">Lower lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm</p><div class="textfl" id="p1605">The lower lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm perforates the lateral head of triceps distal to the deltoid tuberosity, passes to the front of the elbow close to the cephalic vein, and supplies the skin of the lateral part of the lower half of the arm.</div></section><section><a id="s1295"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1035">Posterior cutaneous nerve of the forearm</p><div class="textfl" id="p1610">The posterior cutaneous nerve of the forearm arises with the lower lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm. Perforating the lateral head of triceps, it descends first lateral in the arm, then along the dorsum of the forearm to the wrist, supplying the skin in its course. It supplies the central forearm skin along its course and, near its termination, joins the dorsal branches of the lateral cutaneous nerve of the forearm.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1300"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1040">Superficial radial nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p1615">The superficial radial nerve descends from the lateral epicondyle anterolaterally in the proximal two-thirds of the forearm, initially lying on supinator, lateral to the radial artery and behind brachioradialis. In the middle third of the forearm, it lies behind brachioradialis, close to the lateral side of the artery. It runs anterior to pronator teres, the radial head of flexor digitorum superficialis and flexor pollicis longus, and usually leaves the artery 7<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm proximal to the wrist and passes deep to the tendon of brachioradialis. It curves round the lateral side of the radius as it descends, pierces the deep fascia and divides into five, sometimes four, dorsal digital nerves. On the dorsum of the hand, it usually communicates with the posterior and lateral cutaneous nerves of the forearm.</div></section><section><a id="s1305"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1045">Dorsal digital nerves</p><div class="textfl" id="p1620">There are usually four or five small dorsal digital nerves (see <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513.xhtml#f0045">Fig. 51.9</a>).The first supplies the skin of the radial side of the thumb and the adjoining thenar eminence, and communicates with branches of the lateral cutaneous nerve of the forearm. The second supplies the medial side of the thumb; the third, the lateral side of the index finger; the fourth, the adjoining sides of the index and middle fingers. The fifth communicates with a ramus of the dorsal branch of the ulnar nerve and supplies the adjoining sides of the middle and ring fingers, where it is frequently replaced by the dorsal branch of the ulnar nerve. The digital nerves of the thumb reach only to the root of the nail; those in the index finger, midway along the middle phalanx; and those to the middle and the lateral part of the ring finger may reach no further than the proximal interphalangeal joints. The remaining distal dorsal areas of the skin in these digits are typically supplied by palmar digital branches of the median and ulnar nerves. However, the superficial terminal branch of the radial nerve may supply the whole dorsum of the hand.</div></section><section><a id="s1310"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1050">Posterior interosseous nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p1625">The posterior interosseous nerve is the deep terminal branch of the radial nerve (see <a href="../B9780702077050000483/B9780702077050000483.xhtml#f0065">Figs 48.9</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0115">50.21</a>). It reaches the back of the forearm by passing round the lateral aspect of the radius between the two heads of supinator (see <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0135">Figs 50.25</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0140">50.26</a>). It supplies supinator both before entering the muscle and as it passes through it. As it emerges from supinator posteriorly, the nerve gives off three short branches to extensor digitorum, extensor digiti minimi and extensor carpi ulnaris, and two longer branches, a medial branch to extensor pollicis longus and extensor indicis, and a lateral branch that supplies abductor pollicis longus and extensor pollicis brevis. The nerve at first lies between the superficial and deep extensor muscles, but at the distal border of extensor pollicis brevis, it passes deep to extensor pollicis longus and, diminished to a fine thread, descends on the interosseous membrane to the dorsum of the carpus. Filaments arising from its flattened termination supply the carpal ligaments and articulations. Articular branches from the posterior interosseous nerve supply carpal, distal radio-ulnar and some intercarpal and intermetacarpal joints. Digital branches supply the metacarpophalangeal and proximal interphalangeal joints.</div><div class="text" id="p1630">The distal portion of the nerve lies in a separate fascial sheath in the radial, deep, aspect of the fourth dorsal compartment of the extensor retinaculum of the wrist, where it is located deep to extensor digitorum and extensor indicis.</div><div class="text" id="p1635">Branches of the superficial branch of the radial nerve reach the hand by curving around the wrist over the tendons of abductor pollicis longus and extensor pollicis brevis, and dividing into dorsal digital nerves (see <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513_split_a.xhtml#f0165">Fig. 51.37</a>). They usually communicate with the posterior and lateral cutaneous nerves of the forearm on the dorsum of the hand.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1315"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1055">Lesions of the radial nerve</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1640">Radial nerve compression may occur at several sites in the elbow and forearm. The most proximal of these is within the radial tunnel which starts where the deep branch of the radial nerve lies over the radiohumeral joint and ends at the point where the deep branch becomes the posterior interosseous nerve at the distal border of supinator. At the level of the radial head, the nerve may be compressed by fibrous bands. More distally, it has been suggested that branches of the radial recurrent artery may compress the posterior interosseous nerve. Other sites of compression are the tendinous edge of the deep surface of extensor carpi radialis brevis and the point at which the nerve passes under the arcade of Frohse and between the two heads of supinator. Rarely, the nerve can be compressed at the level of the distal border of supinator.</div><div class="text" id="p1645">Patients present with one of two syndromes: the radial tunnel syndrome, in which the presentation is that of pain along the lateral border of the elbow and upper forearm (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib100" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_100">Roles and Maudsley 1972</a>), or the posterior interosseous nerve syndrome, which presents with motor weakness in the distribution of the nerve particularly affecting the extensors digitorum and carpi ulnaris. Primary treatment is non-operative and involves the avoidance of activities that cause pain, aided by appropriate splintage. In resistant cases, surgical decompression may be necessary. A complete release of all potential areas of compression is essential.</div><div class="text" id="p1650">The elbow is a notorious site for nerve injuries, especially in children. The close proximity of all the major nerve trunks to bone makes them vulnerable. The ulnar nerve is particularly at risk in elbow dislocation, especially when the medial epicondyle is displaced into the joint. All three nerves are at risk of displacement into a dislocated joint. The posterior interosseous and radial nerves are particularly at risk from a Monteggia fracture-dislocation. Any nerve may become entrapped within a fracture, e.g. the median nerve is often accompanied by the brachial artery in cases of supracondylar fracture. Pain that persists, or worsens, after reduction of a fracture suggests impending critical ischaemia, continuing irritation of the nerve, or both. The nerves are at risk during operations or other medical interventions, particularly so when normal anatomical planes are distorted by haematoma, fibrosis or bone fragments.<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E41" id="pagebreak_1.464E41"/><a id="pg1464.e39"/></div></section></section><section><a id="s1320"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle1060">Lumbar and sacral plexuses</h3><div class="textfl" id="p1655">Nerves derived from the lumbar and sacral plexuses innervate the lower limb (see <a href="../B9780702077050000768/B9780702077050000768.xhtml#f0055">Fig. 76.11</a>). The lumbar plexus lies deep within psoas major, anterior to the transverse processes of the first three lumbar vertebrae. The sacral plexus lies in the pelvis on the anterior surface of piriformis, external to the pelvic fascia, which separates it from the inferior gluteal and internal pudendal vessels. The lumbosacral trunk (fourth and fifth lumbar ventral rami) emerges medial to psoas major on the posterior abdominal wall and lies on the ala of the sacrum before crossing the pelvic brim to join the first sacral ventral ramus. Contributions to the lumbosacral trunk may also be derived from the third lumbar nerve (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib3" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_3">Apaydin 2016</a>).</div><section><a id="s1325"/><section><a id="s1330"/><section><a id="s1335"/><h4 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1065">Lesions of the lumbar and sacral plexuses</h4><div class="textfl" id="p1660">The deep and protected situation of the plexuses means that lesions are not common. The lumbar plexus may be involved in retroperitoneal pathology and the sacral plexus may be invaded by pelvic malignancies and both may be involved in the reticuloses, affected by plexiform neuromas, or damaged in fractures of the lumbar spine and pelvis or in other conditions that cause severe retroperitoneal and pelvic haemorrhage. Temporary lesions may occur after pregnancy and childbirth, e.g. after difficult forceps delivery of a large baby. Pain, which may be diffuse, is the most common feature. Iatrogenic injury can occur during surgical approaches to the abdomen and pelvis, particularly when operating within the retroperitoneal space and also during the lateral approach to spine.</div><div class="text" id="p1665">Sciatica is pain in the lower back and hip region, radiating inferiorly along the posterior thigh to the leg. It is often caused by a herniated intervertebral disc, compressing the fifth lumbar or first sacral ventral rami. The so-called piriformis syndrome, which may result from a variant or anomalous relationship between piriformis and the sciatic nerve, may also produce hip pain that radiates inferiorly along the course of the sciatic nerve. Diagnosis of specific nerve injuries relies on the distribution and characteristics of clinical findings in combination with supportive electrophysiological studies and/or MRI and CT scans. The clinical presentation of lesions can vary as a result of anatomical variation and overlapping innervation patterns. Generally, loss of hip flexion and knee extension indicates a lumbar lesion; loss of hip abduction, knee flexion and plantarflexion and dorsiflexion are symptoms of sacral lesions (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib1" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_1">Ahmadian et al 2015</a>).</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s1340"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle1070">Lumbar plexus</h3><div class="textfl" id="p1670">The lumbar plexus is formed by the first three and most of the fourth lumbar ventral rami, usually together with a contribution from the twelfth thoracic ventral ramus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000616/B9780702077050000616.xhtml#f0060">Fig. 61.16</a>). The lumbar ventral rami pass laterally into the posterior part of psoas major, anterior to the transverse processes of the lumbar vertebrae (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib76" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_76">Moro et al 2003</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib9" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_9">Benglis et al 2009</a>). Although there are many variations, the most common arrangement of the plexus is described here (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib126" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_126">Tubbs et al 2018</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p1675">The first lumbar ventral ramus is often joined by a branch from the twelfth thoracic ventral ramus, and these roots contribute to the formation of the iliohypogastric and ilioinguinal nerves, which run laterally on the posterior abdominal wall. A branch from the first lumbar ventral ramus unites with a branch from the second lumbar ventral ramus to form the genitofemoral nerve. The second, third and most of the fourth lumbar ventral rami divide into ventral and dorsal divisions; the ventral divisions unite to form the obturator nerve, while most of the nerve fibres in the dorsal divisions form the femoral nerve. The remaining fibres from the fourth lumbar ventral ramus join the fifth lumbar ventral ramus to form the lumbosacral trunk, which descends to join the sacral plexus. Branches from the dorsal divisions of the second and third lumbar ventral rami unite to form the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve. The accessory obturator nerve, when present, usually arises from the third and fourth ventral rami. The lumbar plexus is supplied by branches from the lumbar vessels that supply psoas major.</div><div class="text" id="p1680">The division of constituent ventral rami into ventral and dorsal branches is not as clear in the lumbar and sacral plexuses as it is in the brachial plexus. Lateral cutaneous branches of the twelfth thoracic and first lumbar ventral rami are drawn into the gluteal skin, but otherwise these nerves are similar to intercostal nerves. The second lumbar ventral ramus is more complex. It contributes substantially to the femoral and obturator nerves, and also has an anterior terminal branch (the genital branch of the genitofemoral) and a lateral cutaneous branch that contributes to the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve and the femoral branch of the genitofemoral nerve. Anterior terminal branches of the third to fifth lumbar and first sacral ventral rami are suppressed, but the corresponding branches of the second and third sacral ventral rami supply the perineal skin.</div><div class="text" id="p1685">The furcal nerve is an independent nerve with its own ventral and dorsal rootlets most commonly arising alongside the fourth lumbar spinal nerve. Its branches contribute to the femoral and obturator nerves arising from the lumbar plexus and to the lumbosacral trunk (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib42" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_42">Harshavardhana and Dabke 2014</a>). The term ‘furcal’ refers to its forked nature, since it links the lumbar and sacral plexuses. Occasionally, the furcal nerve arises at the level of either the third or the fifth lumbar spinal nerves, in which case the sacral plexus is considered prefixed or postfixed, respectively.</div><div class="text" id="p1690">Inflammatory processes, such as retrocaecal appendicitis on the right and diverticular abscess on the left, can occur in the posterior abdominal wall in the tissues immediately anterior to psoas major. These may irritate one or more branches of the lumbar plexus, causing pain or sensory disturbance in the distribution of the affected nerves, e.g. the skin of the thigh, hip or buttock.</div></section><section><a id="s1345"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle1075">Terminal branches of the lumbar plexus</h3><section><a id="s1350"/><section><a id="s1355"/><section><a id="s1360"/><h4 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1080">Muscular branches</h4><div class="textfl" id="p1695">Small branches from the lumbar ventral rami supply adjacent muscles such as psoas major and quadratus lumborum (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib68" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_68">Mahan et al 2017</a>).</div></section></section><section><a id="s1365"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1085">Iliohypogastric nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1700">The iliohypogastric nerve usually originates from the first lumbar ventral ramus but may arise wholly or in part from the twelfth thoracic ventral ramus (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib52" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_52">Klaassen et al 2011</a>). It emerges from the upper lateral border of psoas major and crosses obliquely posterior to the inferior pole of the kidney on the anterior surface of quadratus lumborum. Above the iliac crest it enters the posterior part of transversus abdominis and then runs anteriorly between transversus abdominis and internal abdominal oblique, which it supplies. It gives off a lateral cutaneous branch that pierces internal and external abdominal oblique above the iliac crest and supplies the posterolateral gluteal skin. It continues forwards, pierces internal abdominal oblique approximately 3<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm medial and 1<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm inferior to the anterior superior iliac spine (in adults), and then penetrates the external abdominal oblique aponeurosis approximately 3<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm above and medial to the superficial inguinal ring to supply the skin of the hypogastric region. The iliohypogastric nerve frequently connects with the ilioinguinal nerve and less commonly with the subcostal nerve. Motor branches of the iliohypogastric nerve innervate transversus abdominis and internal abdominal oblique. Cutaneous branches innervate the posterolateral gluteal and skin of the hypogastric region.</div></section><section><a id="s8370"/><section><a id="s1370"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1090">Lesions of the iliohypogastic nerve</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1705">The iliohypogastric nerve is occasionally injured by a surgical incision in the right inguinal region, e.g. during an inguinal hernia repair, open appendicectomy or abdominal wall trocar placement, but there is rarely any noticeable sensory loss because the skin of the hypogastric region is innervated from several sources. Division of the iliohypogastric nerve above the anterior superior iliac spine may weaken the posterior wall of the inguinal canal and predispose to formation of a direct inguinal hernia.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1375"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1095">Ilioinguinal nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1710">The ilioinguinal nerve usually originates from the first lumbar ventral ramus but may receive a contribution from the twelfth thoracic or second lumbar ventral rami (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib52" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Klaassen et al 2011</a>). It emerges from the lateral border of psoas major, with or just inferior to the iliohypogastric nerve, passes obliquely across the anterior aspect of quadratus lumborum and the superior part of iliacus and enters transversus abdominis about 3<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm medial and 4<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm inferior to the anterior superior iliac spine (in the adult); at this site, it is readily blocked by local anaesthetic. In this region, a branch may connect with the iliohypogastric or lateral femoral cutaneous nerve. It pierces internal abdominal oblique more inferiorly, supplies it and then traverses the remainder of the inguinal canal superficial to the spermatic cord or round ligament of the uterus. It emerges with the spermatic cord from the superficial inguinal ring and divides into terminal cutaneous branches.</div><div class="text" id="p1715">Numerous anatomical variations have been described (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib2" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_2">Al-dabbagh 2002</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib82" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_82">Ndiaye et al 2007</a>). The ilioinguinal and genitofemoral nerves may interconnect within the inguinal canal, so that each innervates the skin of the genitalia to a variable extent (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib95" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_95">Rab et al 2001</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib23" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_23">Cesmebasi et al 2015</a>). The ilioinguinal nerve may pierce the aponeurosis of external abdominal oblique proximal to the superficial inguinal ring or divide into terminal branches within the inguinal canal. It may form a common trunk with the iliohypogastric nerve as far as the midpoint of the inguinal canal or may be very small or absent, in which case the iliohypogastric nerve and genital branch of the genitofemoral nerve <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E42" id="pagebreak_1.464E42"/><a id="pg1464.e40"/>supply its territory. Rarely, it arises as a branch of the genitofemoral nerve. Motor branches of the ilioinguinal nerve supply transversus abdominis and internal abdominal oblique; the fibres are given off before the nerve enters the lateral aspect of the inguinal canal. Sensory branches innervate the skin of the proximal medial thigh and the skin over the root of the penis and proximal part of the scrotum in males (anterior scrotal nerve), or the skin covering the mons pubis and the adjoining labium majus in females (anterior labial nerve).</div><section><a id="s1380"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1100">Lesions of the ilioinguinal nerve</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1720">The ilioinguinal nerve may be injured or entrapped during inguinal surgery, particularly for inguinal hernia repair, leading to sensory disturbances including pain from the external genitalia and proximal medial thigh (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib82" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Ndiaye et al 2007</a>).</div></section></section><section><a id="s1385"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1105">Genitofemoral nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1725">The genitofemoral nerve originates from the first and second lumbar ventral rami and is formed within the substance of psoas major. It descends obliquely anteriorly through the muscle to emerge on its anterior surface nearer the medial border, opposite the third or fourth lumbar vertebra (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib76" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Moro et al 2003</a>). It then descends deep to the posterior parietal peritoneum overlying psoas major, crosses obliquely posterior to the ureter, and divides into genital and femoral branches; it may divide close to its origin such that its branches emerge separately from psoas major. The genital branch crosses the distal part of the external iliac artery, enters the inguinal canal through the deep ring and accompanies the spermatic cord or round ligament of the uterus. It exits the superficial inguinal ring, usually posterior to the spermatic cord or round ligament of the uterus, and supplies cremaster and the skin of the external genitalia. The femoral branch descends lateral to the external iliac artery before crossing the deep circumflex iliac artery to pass deep to the inguinal ligament (occasionally, through it) (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib95" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Rab et al 2001</a>) and enter the femoral sheath lateral to the femoral artery. It pierces the anterior aspect of the femoral sheath and fascia lata and supplies the skin over the proximal part of the femoral triangle. It may connect with the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve and anterior femoral cutaneous branches of the femoral nerve. Motor branches of the genitofemoral nerve innervate cremaster via its genital branch. Sensory fibres travelling in the genital branch innervate the skin of the scrotum in males and of the mons pubis and labium majus in females; there is considerable variability and overlap with the cutaneous distribution of the ilio-inguinal nerve (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib23" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Cesmebasi et al 2015</a>).</div><section><a id="s1390"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1110">Lesions of the genitofemoral nerve</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1730">The genital branch of the genitofemoral nerve may be injured during inguinal hernia repair (open or laparoscopic), leading to neuralgia (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib23" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Cesmebasi et al 2015</a>).</div></section></section><section><a id="s1395"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1115">Lateral femoral cutaneous nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1735">The lateral femoral cutaneous nerve (lateral femoral cutaneous nerve of the thigh) is usually derived from the dorsal branches of the second and third lumbar ventral rami, but variable contributions from the first to the third lumbar ventral rami have been described (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib27" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_27">de Ridder et al 1999</a>). The nerve emerges from the posterolateral border of psoas major and crosses iliacus obliquely, running towards the anterior superior iliac spine. It supplies sensory fibres to the parietal peritoneum in the iliac fossa. On the right, the nerve passes posterolateral to the caecum, from which it is separated by the iliac fascia and peritoneum; on the left, it passes posterior to the inferior part of the descending colon. Both nerves usually pass posterior to the inguinal ligament about 1–2<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm medial to the anterior superior iliac spine; occasionally they pass through or, rarely, anterior to the ligament (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib125" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_125">Tubbs et al 2016</a>): a separate fascial canal for this nerve has been described (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib41" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_41">Hanna 2017</a>). Occasionally, the nerve lies anterior or superior to the anterior superior iliac spine as it enters the thigh, where it usually passes anterior or lateral to sartorius, but may also pierce the muscle. It divides into anterior and posterior branches. The anterior branch becomes superficial approximately 10<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm distal to the anterior superior iliac spine and supplies the skin of the anterior and lateral thigh as far distally as the knee. It connects terminally with the cutaneous branches of the anterior division of the femoral nerve and the infrapatellar branch of the saphenous nerve, forming the peripatellar plexus. The posterior branch pierces the fascia lata higher than the anterior, and divides to supply the skin on the lateral surface from the greater trochanter to about mid-thigh. It may also supply skin of the gluteal region.</div><section><a id="s1400"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1120">Lesions of the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1740">The lateral femoral cutaneous nerve may become entrapped at three sites along its course: close to the vertebral column; within the abdominal cavity as the nerve travels across the pelvis; and as it leaves the pelvis. This last site is where the nerve is most commonly damaged, and entrapment is thought to occur as the nerve passes through or deep to the inguinal ligament just medial to the anterior superior iliac spine. The angulation of the nerve as it crosses the iliac crest means that it is vulnerable to compression during movement, e.g. hip extension may increase angulation and tension on the nerve.</div><div class="text" id="p1745">Injury produces an area of impaired sensation, often with pain and paraesthesia on the anterolateral aspect of the thigh (meralgia paraesthetica) in the distal cutaneous distribution of the nerve. This area does not extend across the midline anteriorly, it does not extend below the knee and it does not extend behind the hamstring tendons laterally. Symptoms may be exacerbated when wearing tight belts or tight-waisted clothes or as a result of a recent weight gain or pregnancy. Exceptionally, the posterior branch of the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve, which supplies a thin strip from the greater trochanter of the femur down about two-thirds of the way to the knee, may be affected separately. This branch leaves the main trunk of the nerve, usually distal to the inguinal ligament, and it then turns laterally to pierce tensor fasciae latae, where it may become entrapped.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1405"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1125">Accessory obturator nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1750">The accessory obturator nerve is sometimes present, more often on the left (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib127" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_127">Turgut et al 2017</a>). It arises from the ventral branches of the third and fourth lumbar ventral rami, emerges from the medial border of psoas major, lateral to the obturator nerve, descends along the medial border of psoas major, crosses the superior pubic ramus behind pectineus and divides into branches; one branch enters the deep surface of pectineus, another supplies the hip joint, and a third connects with the anterior branch of the obturator nerve. Sometimes the accessory obturator nerve is very small and only supplies pectineus. Any branch may be absent and others may occur; an additional branch sometimes supplies adductor longus.</div></section><section><a id="s1410"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1130">Femoral nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1755">The femoral nerve is the largest branch of the lumbar plexus and is the nerve of the anterior compartment of the thigh. It has motor branches to iliacus, pectineus, sartorius and quadriceps femoris; articular branches to the hip, knee and ankle joints; cutaneous branches that supply most of the skin covering the anterior thigh, medial leg and medial foot and branches to the femoral artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000616/B9780702077050000616.xhtml#f0060">Fig. 61.16</a>). It arises from the dorsal branches (posterior divisions) of the second to fourth lumbar ventral rami (see <a href="../B9780702077050000768/B9780702077050000768.xhtml#f0055">Figs 76.11A</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X_split_a.xhtml#f0135">77.44</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X_split_a.xhtml#f0155">77.49</a>) and descends through psoas major, emerging on or deep to its lateral border, about 4<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm above the inguinal ligament (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib75" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_75">Moore and Stringer 2011</a>). It next passes between psoas major and iliacus deep to the iliac fascia, lying lateral to the femoral artery and sheath. As it passes behind the inguinal ligament into the thigh, the femoral nerve is split into anterior and posterior divisions by the lateral circumflex femoral artery. The branches of the anterior division are the intermediate and medial femoral cutaneous nerves and the nerve to sartorius. The branches of the posterior division are the saphenous nerve, muscular branches to quadriceps femoris and articular branches to the hip and knee joint. The terminal branches of the femoral nerve form in the femoral triangle about 2<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm distal to the inguinal ligament.</div><section><a id="s1415"/><section><a id="s1420"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1135">Nerve to pectineus</p><div class="textfl" id="p1760">The nerve to pectineus branches from the medial side of the femoral nerve near the inguinal ligament. It passes behind the femoral sheath and enters the anterior aspect of the muscle.</div></section><section><a id="s1425"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1140">Medial femoral cutaneous nerve of the thigh</p><div class="textfl" id="p1765">The medial femoral cutaneous nerve (medial cutaneous nerve of the thigh) is at first lateral to the femoral artery. It crosses anterior to the artery at the apex of the femoral triangle and divides into anterior and posterior branches. Before doing so, it sends a few fibres through the fascia lata to supply the skin of the medial side of the thigh, near the long saphenous vein; one branch emerges via the saphenous opening, while another becomes subcutaneous about mid-thigh. The anterior branch descends on sartorius, perforates the fascia lata beyond mid-thigh, and divides into a branch that supplies the skin as low as the medial side of the knee, and another that runs lateral to the former and connects with the infrapatellar branch of the saphenous nerve. The posterior branch descends along the posterior border of sartorius to the knee, pierces the fascia lata, connects with the saphenous nerve and gives off several cutaneous rami, some as far as the medial side of the leg. The nerve contributes to the subsartorial plexus (see below).</div></section><section><a id="s1430"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1145">Intermediate cutaneous nerve of the thigh</p><div class="textfl" id="p1770">The intermediate femoral cutaneous nerve (intermediate cutaneous nerve of the thigh) usually pierces the fascia lata some 8<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm below the <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E43" id="pagebreak_1.464E43"/><a id="pg1464.e41"/>inguinal ligament, either as two branches or as one trunk that quickly divides into two. These descend on the anterior thigh, supplying the skin as far as the knee and ending in the peripatellar plexus. The lateral branch of the intermediate cutaneous nerve communicates with the femoral branch of the genitofemoral nerve, frequently piercing sartorius and sometimes supplying it.</div></section><section><a id="s1435"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1150">Nerve to sartorius</p><div class="textfl" id="p1775">The main nerve to sartorius arises from the femoral nerve in common with the intermediate femoral cutaneous nerve.</div></section><section><a id="s1440"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1155">Saphenous nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p1780">The saphenous nerve is the largest and longest cutaneous branch of the femoral nerve and the longest nerve in the body (see <a href="../B9780702077050000768/B9780702077050000768.xhtml#f0055">Figs 76.11</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X_split_a.xhtml#f0290">77.48</a>). It descends lateral to the femoral artery in the femoral triangle and enters the adductor canal, where it crosses anterior to the artery to lie medial to it. At the distal end of the canal, it leaves the artery and emerges through the aponeurotic covering with the saphenous branch of the descending genicular artery. As it leaves the adductor canal, the saphenous nerve gives off an infrapatellar branch that contributes to the peripatellar plexus and then pierces the fascia lata between the tendons of sartorius and gracilis, becoming subcutaneous to supply the skin anterior to the patella. It descends along the medial border of the tibia with the long saphenous vein and divides distally into a branch that continues along the tibia to the ankle and a branch that passes anterior to the ankle to supply the skin on the medial side of the foot, often as far as the first metatarsophalangeal joint. The saphenous nerve connects with the medial branch of the superficial fibular nerve. Near the mid-thigh, it contributes a branch to the subsartorial plexus. The nerve may become entrapped as it leaves the adductor canal.</div></section><section><a id="s1445"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1160">Muscular branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p1785">The muscular branches of the posterior division of the femoral nerve supply quadriceps femoris. A branch to rectus femoris enters its proximal posterior surface and also supplies the hip joint. A larger branch to vastus lateralis forms a neurovascular bundle with the descending branch of the lateral circumflex femoral artery in its distal part and also supplies the knee joint. A branch to vastus medialis descends through the proximal part of the adductor canal, lateral to the saphenous nerve and femoral vessels, and enters the muscle at about its midpoint, sending a long articular filament distally along the muscle to the knee. Two or three branches to vastus intermedius enter its anterior surface about mid-thigh, and a small branch from one of these descends through the muscle to supply articularis genus and the knee joint.</div></section><section><a id="s1450"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1165">Vascular branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p1790">Vascular branches of the femoral nerve supply the femoral artery and its branches.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1455"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1170">Lesions of the femoral nerve</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1795">Partial or complete injury can occur during surgery directed to the hip, pelvis or spine; with femoral artery catheterization; from trauma; or as a result of a retroperitoneal haematoma or mass. The most striking feature of femoral neuropathy is wasting and weakness of quadriceps femoris, resulting in difficulty in walking and a tendency for the leg to collapse. Pain and paraesthesia may occur on the anterior and medial aspect of the thigh, extending down the medial aspect of the leg in the distribution of the saphenous branch of the femoral nerve.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1460"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1175">Obturator nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1800">The obturator nerve is the nerve of the medial compartment of the thigh: it arises from the ventral branches of the second to fourth lumbar ventral rami. The branch from the third is the largest while that from the second is often very small. The nerve descends within the substance of psoas major, emerging from its posteromedial border near the fifth lumbar vertebra (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib51" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_51">Kirchmair et al 2008</a>). It passes posterior to the common iliac vessels and lateral to the internal iliac vessels, descends on the lateral wall of the pelvis attached to the obturator fascia, and lies anterosuperior to the obturator vessels before running into the obturator canal to enter the thigh. Near the foramen, it divides into anterior and posterior branches, separated initially by part of obturator externus and further distally by adductor brevis.</div><div class="text" id="p1805">The obturator nerve is said to have no branches in the abdomen or pelvis, although it has been reported to send articular branches to the anterior aspect of the sacroiliac joint. Its sensory branches innervate the hip and knee joints, and a small, variable patch of skin on the proximal medial thigh, and its motor branches innervate obturator externus, adductor longus, adductor brevis, adductor magnus, gracilis and sometimes pectineus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000616/B9780702077050000616.xhtml#f0060">Fig. 61.16</a>) (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib125" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Tubbs et al 2016</a>).</div><section><a id="s1465"/><section><a id="s1470"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1180">Anterior branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p1810">The anterior branch (see <a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X_split_a.xhtml#f0155">Fig. 77.49</a>) leaves the pelvis anterior to obturator externus, and descends anterior to adductor brevis, behind pectineus and adductor longus. At the lower border of adductor longus it communicates with the medial cutaneous and saphenous branches of the femoral nerve, to form a subsartorial plexus that supplies the skin on the medial side of the thigh. It descends on, and supplies, the femoral artery. Near the obturator foramen, the anterior branch supplies the hip joint. Behind pectineus it supplies adductor longus, gracilis, usually adductor brevis and often pectineus, and connects with the accessory obturator nerve (when present). Occasionally the communicating branch to the femoral medial cutaneous and saphenous branches continues as a cutaneous branch to the thigh and leg. When this occurs the nerve emerges from behind the distal border of adductor longus to descend along the posterior margin of sartorius to the knee, where it pierces the deep fascia and connects with the saphenous nerve to supply the skin halfway down the medial side of the leg.</div><section><a id="s1475"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1185">Subsartorial nerve plexus</p><div class="textfl" id="p1815">The medial cutaneous nerve of the thigh forms a subsartorial plexus with branches of the saphenous and obturator nerves, deep to the fascia lata, at the lower border of adductor longus. When the communicating branch of the obturator nerve is large and reaches the leg, the posterior branch of the medial cutaneous nerve is small, and ends in the plexus from which it gives rise to a few cutaneous filaments.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1480"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1190">Posterior branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p1820">The posterior branch pierces obturator externus anteriorly, supplies it and passes behind adductor brevis to the front of adductor magnus, dividing into branches to this and adductor brevis when the latter is not supplied by the anterior division. It usually sends an articular filament to the knee joint, which either perforates adductor magnus distally or traverses its opening with the femoral artery to enter the popliteal fossa. Within the fossa, the nerve descends on the popliteal artery to the back of the knee, pierces its oblique posterior ligament and supplies the articular capsule. It gives filaments to the popliteal artery.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1485"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1195">Lesions of the obturator nerve</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1825">Isolated lesions of the obturator nerve are rare. However, it may be injured together with other nerves in retroperitoneal lesions that occur close to the origins of the lumbar plexus, or by an acetabular fracture, pelvic tumour, obturator hernia, prolonged labour or direct trauma. It can be damaged iatrogenically following manipulation, transection or retraction during pelvic surgery and can become entrapped within the fascia overlying adductor brevis. Compression of the nerve by herniated bowel loops at the obturator foramen can result in pain referred to the hip, medial thigh and knee, the so-called Howship–Romberg sign. A more distal nerve entrapment syndrome causing chronic medial thigh pain has been described in athletes with large adductor muscles.</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s1490"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle1200">Sacral plexus</h3><div class="textfl" id="p1830">The sacral plexus is formed by the lumbosacral trunk, the first to third sacral ventral rami, and part of the fourth sacral ventral ramus (the remainder of the fourth sacral ventral ramus joins the coccygeal plexus). The lumbar part of the lumbosacral trunk contains part of the fourth and all of the fifth lumbar ventral rami; it appears at the medial margin of psoas major and descends over the linea terminalis, at first medial to and then distally crossing anterior to the sacroiliac joint, to join the first sacral ventral ramus. The greater parts of the second and third sacral rami converge on the inferomedial aspect of the lumbosacral trunk in the greater sciatic foramen to form the sciatic nerve. The ventral and dorsal divisions of the nerves do not separate physically from each other but their fibres remain separate within the rami; the ventral and dorsal divisions of each contributing root join within the sciatic nerve. The fibres of the dorsal divisions will go on to form the common fibular nerve, and the fibres of the ventral division form the tibial nerve. Occasionally, the sciatic nerve divides into common fibular and tibial nerves inside the pelvis; when this occurs, the common fibular nerve usually runs through piriformis.</div><div class="text" id="p1835">The sacral plexus lies against the posterior pelvic wall anterior to piriformis, posterior to the internal iliac vessels and ureter, and posterior to the sigmoid colon on the left. The superior gluteal vessels run either between the lumbosacral trunk and first sacral ventral ramus, or between the first and second sacral rami, while the inferior gluteal vessels lie between either the first and second, or the second and third, sacral ventral rami.</div><div class="text" id="p1840">The sacral plexus is not commonly involved in malignant tumours of the pelvis because it lies behind the relatively dense presacral fascia, <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E44" id="pagebreak_1.464E44"/><a id="pg1464.e42"/>which resists all but locally very advanced malignant infiltration. When it occurs, there is intractable pain in the distribution of the branches of the plexus, which can be very difficult to treat. The plexus can also be involved in reticuloses or be affected by plexiform neuromas. The branches of the sacral plexus are shown in <a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X_split_a.xhtml#t0010">Table 77.1</a>.</div><section><a id="s1495"/><section><a id="s1500"/><h4 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1205">Sacral visceral and muscular branches</h4><div class="textfl" id="p1845">Visceral branches, the pelvic splanchnic nerves, arise from the second to fourth sacral verntral rami and innervate the pelvic viscera.</div><div class="text" id="p1850">Several muscular branches arise from the fourth sacral ventral ramus to supply the superior surface of levator ani and the upper part of the external anal sphincter. The branches to levator ani enter the superior surface of the muscle. The branch to the external anal sphincter (also referred to as the perineal branch of the fourth sacral nerve) reaches the ischio-anal fossa by running either through ischiococcygeus or between ischiococcygeus and iliococcygeus: it also supplies the skin between the anus and coccyx.</div></section><section><a id="s1505"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1210">Superior gluteal nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1855">The superior gluteal nerve arises from the dorsal branches of the fourth and fifth lumbar and first sacral ventral rami. Accompanied by the superior gluteal vessels, the nerve leaves the pelvis via the greater sciatic foramen above piriformis, and divides into superior and inferior branches (see <a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X_split_a.xhtml#f0150">Fig. 77.47</a>). The superior branch accompanies the upper branch of the deep division of the superior gluteal artery to supply gluteus medius and occasionally gluteus minimus. The inferior branch runs with the lower ramus of the deep division of the superior gluteal artery across gluteus minimus, supplies the glutei medius and minimus, and ends in tensor fasciae latae.</div></section><section><a id="s1510"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1215">Inferior gluteal nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1860">The inferior gluteal nerve arises from the dorsal branches of the fifth lumbar and first and second sacral ventral rami. It leaves the pelvis via the greater sciatic foramen below piriformis, and divides into branches that enter the deep surface of gluteus maximus (see <a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X_split_a.xhtml#f0150">Fig. 77.47</a>).</div><section><a id="s1515"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1220">Lesions of the superior and inferior gluteal nerves</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1865">Focal lesions of the superior and inferior gluteal nerves usually occur concurrently with those of the sciatic nerve, posterior femoral cutaneous nerve and/or pudendal nerve. However, both gluteal nerves are vulnerable to injury during total hip replacement, and less commonly due to blunt trauma or misplaced gluteal injections. Injury to the superior gluteal nerve causing paralysis of gluteus medius and minimus can result in Trendelenburg’s sign, where the pelvis drops on the unsupported side (in the coronal plane) when standing on the affected limb. Injury to the inferior gluteal nerve results in weakness of gluteus maximus causing impaired hip extension (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib58" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_58">Kretschmer and Heinen 2015</a>).</div></section></section><section><a id="s1520"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1225">Pudendal nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1870">The pudendal nerve arises from the ventral divisions of the second, third and fourth sacral ventral rami and is formed just above the superior border of the sacrotuberous ligament and the upper fibres of ischiococcygeus (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib53" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_53">Klink 1953</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib107" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_107">Sato 1980</a>). It leaves the pelvis via the greater sciatic foramen between piriformis and ischiococcygeus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000719/B9780702077050000719.xhtml#f0040">Fig. 71.10</a>), enters the gluteal region and passes dorsal to the sacrospinous ligament, close to its attachment to the ischial spine, where it lies medial to the internal pudendal vessels. It accompanies the internal pudendal artery through the lesser sciatic foramen into the pudendal canal on the lateral wall of the ischio-anal fossa. In the posterior part of the canal, it gives rise to the inferior anal (rectal) and perineal nerves; the dorsal nerve of the penis or clitoris continues anteriorly from this origin.</div><div class="text" id="p1875">The course of the branches of the pudendal nerve parallels that of the pudendal vessels (see <a href="../B9780702077050000744/B9780702077050000744.xhtml#f0095">Figs 74.24</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000756/B9780702077050000756.xhtml#f0025">75.4</a>). Muscular branches that arise directly from the pudendal nerve supply the superficial transverse perineal muscles, bulbospongiosus, ischiocavernosus, the external urethral sphincter and the anterior parts of the external anal sphincter and levator ani. In males, the branch to bulbospongiosus pierces this muscle to supply the corpus spongiosum penis, and ends in the urethral mucosa. For the innervation of the female genitalia, see <a href="../B9780702077050000756/B9780702077050000756.xhtml#t0015">Table 75.2</a>.</div><div class="text" id="p1880">The pudendal nerve occupies a constant position over the ischial spine and it can be ‘blocked’ by infiltration with a local anaesthetic applied via a needle passed through the lateral wall of the vagina to anaesthetize the perineal and anal skin. It can also be palpated over the ischial spine through the lateral wall of the rectum.</div><section><a id="s1525"/><section><a id="s1530"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1230">Inferior anal nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p1885">The inferior anal (rectal) nerve runs either through the medial wall of the pudendal canal with the inferior anorectal vessels, or behind the sacrospinous ligament directly from the fourth sacral ventral ramus without passing through the pudendal canal (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib69" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_69">Maldonado et al 2015</a>), or occasionally it arises directly from the sacral plexus and crosses the sacrospinous ligament or rejoins the pudendal nerve. The nerve crosses the ischio-anal fossa to supply the external anal sphincter, the lining of the distal part of the anal canal and the skin around the anus. It frequently breaks into terminal branches before reaching the lateral border of the external anal sphincter. Its cutaneous branches distributed around the anus overlap the branches of the perineal branch of the posterior femoral cutaneous nerve and of the posterior scrotal or labial nerves. In females, the inferior anal nerve can supply sensory branches to the distal part of the vagina.</div></section><section><a id="s1535"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1235">Perineal nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p1890">The perineal nerve is the inferior and larger terminal branch of the pudendal nerve in the pudendal canal. It runs anteriorly, inferior to the internal pudendal artery and accompanies the perineal artery, dividing into posterior scrotal or posterior labial and muscular branches. The posterior scrotal or labial nerves are usually double; they have medial and lateral branches that run over the perineal membrane and pass anteriorly in the lateral part of the urogenital triangle with the posterior scrotal or posterior labial branches of the perineal artery. They supply the skin of the scrotum or labia majora, respectively, overlapping the distribution of the perineal branch of the posterior femoral cutaneous nerve and inferior anal nerve. In females, the posterior labial branches also supply sensory fibres to the skin of the distal vagina.</div></section><section><a id="s1540"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1240">Dorsal nerve of the penis or clitoris</p><div class="textfl" id="p1895">The dorsal nerve of the penis or clitoris runs anteriorly above the internal pudendal artery along the ischiopubic ramus, deep to the perineal membrane. It supplies the corpus cavernosum and accompanies the dorsal artery of the penis or clitoris between the layers of the suspensory ligament of the penis or clitoris. The dorsal nerve of the penis runs on the dorsum of the penis to end in the glans penis.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s1545"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1245">Perforating cutaneous nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1900">The perforating cutaneous nerve usually arises from the posterior aspects of the second and third sacral ventral spinal rami. It pierces the sacrotuberous ligament, curves round the inferior border of gluteus maximus and supplies the skin over the inferomedial aspect of this muscle. The nerve may arise from the pudendal nerve or it may be absent, in which case it may be replaced either by a branch from the posterior femoral cutaneous nerve or from the third and fourth, or fourth and fifth, sacral ventral rami.</div></section><section><a id="s1550"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1250">Nerve to quadratus femoris</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1905">The nerve to quadratus femoris arises from the ventral branches of the fourth lumbar to the first sacral ventral rami. It leaves the pelvis via the greater sciatic foramen below piriformis, descends on the ischium deep to the sciatic nerve, the gemelli and the tendon of obturator internus, and supplies gemellus inferior, quadratus femoris and the hip joint.</div></section><section><a id="s1555"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1255">Nerve to obturator internus</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1910">The nerve to obturator internus arises from the ventral branches of the fifth lumbar and first and second sacral ventral rami. It leaves the pelvis via the greater sciatic foramen below piriformis, supplies a branch to the upper posterior surface of gemellus superior, crosses the ischial spine lateral to the internal pudendal vessels, re-enters the pelvis via the lesser sciatic foramen, and enters the pelvic surface of obturator internus.</div></section><section><a id="s1560"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1260">Posterior femoral cutaneous nerve (posterior cutaneous nerve of the thigh)</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1915">The posterior femoral cutaneous nerve (posterior cutaneous nerve of the thigh) arises from the dorsal branches of the first and second, and the ventral branches of the second and third sacral rami. It leaves the pelvis via the greater sciatic foramen below piriformis and descends under gluteus maximus with the inferior gluteal vessels, lying posterior or medial to the sciatic nerve (see <a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X_split_a.xhtml#f0150">Fig. 77.47</a>). It descends in the back of the thigh superficial to the long head of biceps femoris, deep to the fascia lata. It pierces the deep fascia behind the knee and accompanies the short saphenous vein to mid-calf, its terminal twigs connecting with the sural nerve. Its branches are cutaneous and are distributed to the gluteal region, perineum, posterior thigh and proximal posterior leg.</div><div class="text" id="p1920">Three or four gluteal branches (inferior clunial nerves) curl round the lower border of gluteus maximus to supply the skin over the inferolateral portion of the muscle. The perineal branch supplies the superomedial skin in the thigh, curves forwards across the hamstrings below the ischial tuberosity, pierces the fascia lata and then runs in the <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E45" id="pagebreak_1.464E45"/><a id="pg1464.e43"/>superficial perineal fascia to the scrotal or labial skin. It communicates with the inferior anal (rectal) and posterior scrotal or labial branches of the perineal nerve, and gives numerous branches to the skin of the back and medial side of the thigh, the popliteal fossa and the proximal part of the back of the leg. One study found the perineal branch of the posterior cutaneous nerve of the thigh in about one-half of specimens (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib122" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_122">Tubbs et al 2009</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s1565"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1265">Nerve to piriformis</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1925">The nerve to piriformis usually arises from the dorsal branches of the first and second sacral ventral rami (sometimes only the second) and enters the anterior surface of piriformis.</div></section><section><a id="s1570"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1270">Sciatic nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1930">The sciatic nerve is typically 2<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm wide at its origin and is the thickest nerve in the body. It travels in the posterior compartment of the thigh and supplies the leg and foot. It leaves the pelvis via the greater sciatic foramen, usually inferior to piriformis, and descends between the greater trochanter and ischial tuberosity, along the back of the thigh, dividing into the tibial and common fibular nerves at a varying level proximal to the knee (see <a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X_split_a.xhtml#f0160">Fig. 77.50</a>; see also <a href="../B9780702077050000768/B9780702077050000768.xhtml#f0055">Fig. 76.11B</a>). Superiorly, it lies deep to gluteus maximus, resting first on the posterior ischial surface with the nerve to quadratus femoris between them. It then crosses posterior to obturator internus, the gemelli and quadratus femoris, separated by the latter from obturator externus and the hip joint. It is accompanied medially by the posterior femoral cutaneous nerve and the inferior gluteal artery. More distally, it lies behind adductor magnus and is crossed posteriorly by the long head of biceps femoris. Its course corresponds to a line drawn from just medial to the midpoint between the ischial tuberosity and greater trochanter to the apex of the popliteal fossa. Articular branches arise proximally to supply the hip joint through its posterior capsule; these are sometimes derived directly from the sacral plexus. Muscular branches are distributed to biceps femoris, semitendinosus, semimembranosus and the ischial part of adductor magnus.</div><div class="text" id="p1935">The point of division of the sciatic nerve into its tibial and common fibular components is very variable: the two large nerves are only loosely held together as the sciatic nerve and the level of their separation in the thigh is variable. The common site is at the junction of the middle and lower thirds of the thigh, near the apex of the popliteal fossa, but the division may occur at any level above this point and, rarely, may occur below it: the common variations of the sciatic nerve have been classified into six types (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib7" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_7">Beaton and Anson 1937</a>). The tibial nerve is derived from the anterior divisions of the sacral plexus and the common fibular nerve is derived from the posterior divisions of the plexus. The medial (tibial) component innervates the posterior thigh muscles, including the ischial part of adductor magnus, but not the short head of biceps femoris, which is supplied by the lateral (common fibular) component.</div><section><a id="s1575"/><section><a id="s1580"/><section><a id="s1585"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1275">Blood supply to the sciatic nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p1940">In the gluteal region, the sciatic nerve is supplied by the inferior gluteal artery and cruciate anastomosis (the medial and lateral circumflex femoral arteries, inferior gluteal artery and the first perforating branch of the profunda femoris artery) (see <a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X_split_a.xhtml#f0150">Fig. 77.47</a>). On rare occasions, it is supplied by branches from the superior gluteal or internal pudendal arteries, which reach the nerve on its medial side. Lower in the thigh, arterial branches derived from the perforating branches of the profunda femoris artery or the anastomotic chain between them or, occasionally, from the popliteal artery, enter the nerve on its lateral or anterolateral side (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib118" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_118">Sunderland 1945</a>). The numerous arterial branches to the sciatic nerve anastomose with each other to form extraneural and intraneural arterial chains (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib118" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Sunderland 1945</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib128" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_128">Ugrenovic et al 2013</a>).</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s1590"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1280">Lesions of the sciatic nerve</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1945">The sciatic nerve supplies the posterior thigh muscles and all the muscles below the knee, which means that a complete palsy of the sciatic nerve results in a flail foot and severe difficulty in walking. Fortunately, complete sciatic nerve palsy is very rare. The nerve is vulnerable in posterior dislocation of the hip. As it leaves the pelvis, it passes either inferior to piriformis or sometimes through the muscle, and at that point it may very rarely become entrapped or tethered; the piriformis syndrome is a controversial condition in which an anomalous relationship between piriformis and the sciatic nerve is thought to cause pain in the buttocks and along the course of the sciatic nerve. External compression over the buttock, e.g. in patients who lie immobile on a hard surface for a considerable length of time, can injure the nerve. However, the most common cause of serious sciatic nerve injury (and of the resulting major medicolegal claims) is iatrogenic (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib29" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_29">Dillow et al 2013</a>). The nerve may be iatrogenically damaged in misplaced therapeutic injections into gluteus maximus. Sciatic nerve palsy occurs after total hip replacement or similar surgery in 1% of cases, and may be caused by sharp injury, burning from bone cement, traction from instruments, manipulation of the hip, inadvertent lengthening of the femur, or haematoma surrounding the nerve. For some reason, possibly anatomical, the common fibular component of the sciatic nerve is more usually affected, resulting in a foot drop and a high-stepping gait.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1595"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1285">Tibial nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1950">The tibial nerve, the larger component of the sciatic nerve, is derived from the ventral branches (anterior divisions) of the fourth and fifth lumbar and first to third sacral ventral rami. It descends along the posterior thigh and popliteal fossa to the distal border of popliteus. It then passes anterior to the arch of soleus with the popliteal artery and continues into the leg. In the thigh, it is overlapped proximally by the hamstring muscles but it becomes more superficial in the popliteal fossa, where it is lateral to the popliteal vessels. At the level of the knee, the tibial nerve becomes superficial to the popliteal vessels and crosses to the medial side of the artery. In the distal popliteal fossa, it is overlapped by the junction of the two heads of gastrocnemius.</div><div class="text" id="p1955">In the leg, the tibial nerve is the nerve of the posterior compartment. It descends with the posterior tibial vessels to lie between the heel and the medial malleolus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000781/B9780702077050000781.xhtml#f0025">Fig. 78.4</a>). Proximally, it is deep to soleus and gastrocnemius, but in its distal third is covered only by skin and fasciae, and overlapped sometimes by flexor hallucis longus. At first medial to the posterior tibial vessels, it crosses behind them and descends lateral to them until it bifurcates. It lies on tibialis posterior for most of its course except distally, where it adjoins the posterior surface of the tibia. The tibial nerve ends under the flexor retinaculum by dividing into the medial and lateral plantar nerves.</div><div class="text" id="p1960">The branches of the tibial nerve are articular, muscular (to gastrocnemius, plantaris, soleus, popliteus, tibialis posterior, flexor digitorum longus and flexor hallucis longus), sural, medial calcaneal and medial and lateral plantar nerves.</div><section><a id="s1600"/><section><a id="s1605"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1290">Articular branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p1965">Articular branches to the knee joint accompany the superior and inferior medial genicular arteries and the middle genicular artery; they form a plexus with a branch from the obturator nerve and also supply the oblique popliteal ligament. The branches accompanying the superior and inferior medial genicular arteries supply the medial part of the capsule. A branch of the nerve to popliteus (tibial nerve) supplies the posterior portion of the superior tibiofibular joint. Just before the tibial nerve bifurcates, it gives off branches that supply the ankle joint.</div></section><section><a id="s1610"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1295">Muscular branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p1970">Proximal muscular branches arise between the heads of gastrocnemius and supply gastrocnemius, plantaris, soleus and popliteus. The nerve to soleus enters its superficial aspect. The branch to popliteus descends obliquely across the popliteal vessels, curling round the distal border of the muscle to its anterior surface. It also supplies tibialis posterior, the superior tibiofibular joint and the tibia, and gives off an interosseous branch that descends near the fibula to reach the distal tibiofibular joint.</div><div class="text" id="p1975">Muscular branches in the leg, either independently or by a common trunk, supply soleus (on its deep surface), tibialis posterior, flexor digitorum longus and flexor hallucis longus. The branch to flexor hallucis longus accompanies the fibular vessels.</div></section><section><a id="s1615"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1300">Sural nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p1980">The sural nerve descends between the heads of gastrocnemius, pierces the deep fascia proximally in the leg, and is joined at a variable level by the sural communicating branch of the common fibular nerve. Some authors term this branch the lateral sural cutaneous nerve, and call the main trunk (from the tibial nerve) the medial sural cutaneous nerve. The sural nerve descends lateral to the calcaneal tendon, near the short saphenous vein, to the region between the lateral malleolus and the calcaneus, and supplies the posterior and lateral skin of the distal third of the leg. It then passes distal to the lateral malleolus along the lateral side of the foot and fifth toe, supplying the overlying skin. It connects with the posterior femoral cutaneous nerve in the leg and with the superficial fibular nerve on the dorsum of the foot.</div><div class="text" id="p1985">The sural nerve is often used as an autologous peripheral nerve graft on the grounds that it is easily harvested, readily identified and exclusively cutaneous.</div></section><section><a id="s1620"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1305">Medial calcaneal nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p1990">The medial calcaneal nerve arises from the tibial nerve and perforates the flexor retinaculum to supply the skin of the heel and medial side of the sole.<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E46" id="pagebreak_1.464E46"/><a id="pg1464.e44"/></div></section><section><a id="s1625"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1310">Medial plantar nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p1995">The medial plantar nerve is the larger terminal division of the tibial nerve, and lies lateral to the medial plantar artery. From its origin under the flexor retinaculum, it passes deep to abductor hallucis, then appears between it and flexor digitorum brevis, gives off a medial proper digital nerve to the great toe, and divides near the metatarsal bases into three common plantar digital nerves (see <a href="../B9780702077050000793/B9780702077050000793.xhtml#f0125">Fig. 79.27</a>; see also <a href="../B9780702077050000793/B9780702077050000793.xhtml#f0100">Fig. 79.22</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p2000">Cutaneous branches pierce the plantar aponeurosis between abductor hallucis and flexor digitorum brevis to supply the skin of the sole of the foot. Muscular branches supply abductor hallucis, flexor digitorum brevis, flexor hallucis brevis and the first lumbrical. The first two arise near the origin of the nerve and enter the deep surfaces of the muscles. The branch to flexor hallucis brevis is from the hallucal medial digital nerve, and that to the first lumbrical from the first common plantar digital nerve. Articular branches supply the joints of the tarsus and metatarsus.</div><div class="text" id="p2005">Three common plantar digital nerves pass between the slips of the plantar aponeurosis, each dividing into two proper digital branches. The first supplies adjacent sides of the great and second toes; the second supplies adjacent sides of the second and third toes; and the third supplies adjacent sides of the third and fourth toes, and also connects with the lateral plantar nerve. The first gives a branch to the first lumbrical. Each proper digital nerve has cutaneous and articular branches: near the distal phalanges, a dorsal branch supplies structures around the nail. Abductor hallucis, flexor hallucis brevis and the first lumbrical are all supplied by the medial plantar nerve.</div></section><section><a id="s1630"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1315">Lateral plantar nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p2061">The lateral plantar nerve supplies the skin of the fifth toe, the lateral half of the fourth toe, and most of the deep muscles of the foot (see <a href="../B9780702077050000793/B9780702077050000793.xhtml#f0100">Fig. 79.22</a>). It is located medial to the lateral plantar artery and courses anteriorly towards the tubercle of the fifth metatarsal. Next, it passes between flexor digitorum brevis and flexor accessorius, and ends between flexor digiti minimi brevis and abductor digiti minimi by dividing into superficial and deep branches. Before division, it supplies flexor accessorius and abductor digiti minimi, and gives rise to small branches that pierce the plantar aponeurosis to supply the skin of the lateral part of the sole (see <a href="../B9780702077050000793/B9780702077050000793.xhtml#f0125">Fig. 79.27</a>). The superficial branch splits into two common plantar digital nerves: the lateral supplies the lateral side of the fifth toe, flexor digiti minimi brevis and the two interossei in the fourth intermetatarsal space; the medial connects with the third common plantar digital branch of the medial plantar nerve and divides into two to supply the adjoining sides of the fourth and fifth toes. The deep branch accompanies the lateral plantar artery deep to the flexor tendons and adductor hallucis, and supplies the second to fourth lumbricals, adductor hallucis and all the interossei (except those of the fourth intermetatarsal space). Branches to the second and third lumbricals pass distally deep to the transverse head of adductor hallucis, and travel around its distal border to reach them (see Video 79.1).</div></section></section><section><a id="s1635"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1320">Lesions of the tibial nerve</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2015">The tibial nerve is vulnerable to direct injury in the popliteal fossa, where it lies superficial to the popliteal vessels at the level of the knee, or to compression at the tendinous arch of the soleus. It may be damaged in compartment syndrome that affects the deep flexor compartment of the calf. All nerves of the foot can be affected by entrapment, leading classically to a burning sensation in the distribution of that nerve. Tarsal tunnel syndrome is much less common than carpal tunnel syndrome. The flexor retinaculum may compress the tibial nerve or either of its branches (medial and lateral plantar nerves); entrapment at this level is most commonly due to a space-occupying lesion, e.g. a ganglion, or to compression by either a leash of vessels or the deep fascia associated with abductor hallucis. Compression of the first branch of the lateral plantar nerve (Baxter’s nerve) by the deep fascia that covers abductor hallucis has been implicated as a possible cause of chronic heel pain and of plantar fasciitis. (Plantar fasciitis, often caused by repetitive high-impact injury to the foot, may be associated with pain, especially over the medial calcaneal process, which may be exacerbated by passive ankle or great toe flexion.) The medial plantar nerve can be compressed at the ‘knot of Henry’, which is the point where the tendon of flexor hallucis longus crosses deep to the tendon of flexor digitorum longus, to reach its medial side in the sole of the foot. It may also be compressed between abductor hallucis and the navicular bone (‘jogger’s foot’). Sural nerve entrapment is usually not due to compression by fascial elements. Entrapment of the third common digital nerve as it passes deep to the intermetatarsal ligament of the third (or less commonly the second) web space can result in a Morton’s neuroma, which is probably the most common form of nerve entrapment in the foot.</div><div class="text" id="p2062">Depending on the level of the injury, damage to the tibial nerve can produce weakness of knee flexion, plantarflexion, inversion and toe flexion, accompanied by sensory loss in the lower lateral leg, heel and sole of the foot.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1640"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1325">Common fibular nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2025">The common fibular nerve (common peroneal nerve) is the nerve of the anterior and lateral compartments in the leg. It is approximately half the size of the tibial nerve and is derived from the dorsal (posterior) branches of the fourth and fifth lumbar and first and second sacral ventral rami. It descends obliquely along the lateral side of the popliteal fossa to the fibular head, medial to biceps femoris. It lies between the tendon of biceps femoris, to which it is bound by fascia, and the lateral head of gastrocnemius (see <a href="../B9780702077050000781/B9780702077050000781.xhtml#f0215">Fig. 78.41</a>). The nerve then passes into the anterolateral compartment of the leg through a tight opening in the thick fascia overlying tibialis anterior. It curves lateral to the neck of the fibula, lying on the bone deep to fibularis longus, and divides into superficial and deep fibular nerves; an articular trunk, derived from the deep fibular nerve, provides an articular branch that travels with the anterior tibial recurrent artery and a proximal branch to tibialis anterior.</div><div class="text" id="p2030">The common fibular nerve supplies the anterolateral part of the knee joint capsule and the proximal tibiofibular joint and the skin on the anterior, posterior and lateral surfaces of the proximal leg. The superficial peroneal nerve supplies fibulares longus and brevis and the skin of the lower leg before dividing into medial and intermediate dorsal cutaneous nerves. The deep fibular nerve supplies muscular branches to tibialis anterior, extensors hallucis longus and digitorum longus and fibularis tertius, and an articular branch to the ankle joint, before dividing into lateral and medial terminal branches.</div><div class="text" id="p2035">The common fibular nerve has articular and cutaneous branches, and terminates as the superficial and deep fibular nerves.</div><section><a id="s1645"/><section><a id="s1650"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1330">Articular branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p2040">There are three articular branches. Two accompany the superior and inferior lateral genicular arteries; they may arise in common. The third, the recurrent articular branch, arises near the termination of the common fibular nerve. It ascends with the anterior recurrent tibial artery through tibialis anterior and supplies the anterolateral part of the knee joint capsule and the proximal tibiofibular joint.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s8615"/><section><a id="s7655"/><section><a id="s1655"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1335">Cutaneous branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p2045">The two cutaneous branches, often from a common trunk, are the lateral sural and sural communicating nerves. The lateral sural cutaneous nerve (lateral cutaneous nerve of the calf) supplies the skin on the anterior, posterior and lateral surfaces of the proximal leg. The sural communicating nerve arises near the head of the fibula and crosses the lateral head of gastrocnemius to join the sural nerve. It may descend separately as far as the heel.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1660"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1340">Lesions of the common fibular nerve</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2050">The common fibular nerve is relatively unprotected as it traverses the lateral aspect of the neck of the fibula and is easily compressed at this site, e.g. by plaster casts or ganglia. The nerve may also become entrapped by a fascial band beneath fibularis longus within the so-called fibular tunnel, between the attachments of fibularis longus to the head and shaft of the fibula. Traction lesions can accompany dislocations of the lateral compartment of the knee, and are most likely to occur if the distal attachments of biceps femoris and the ligaments that insert on to the fibular head are avulsed, possibly with a small part of the fibular head; the nerve is tethered to the tendon of biceps femoris by dense fascia and so is pulled proximally. Severe traction lesions may produce longitudinal injuries affecting a long segment of the common fibular nerve. Torsional injury following ankle injury (sprain or fracture) may result in common fibular neuropathy; the injury is transmitted from the ankle along the interosseous membrane to the proximal leg (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib61" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_61">Lalezari et al 2012</a>). Patients with such injury present with a foot drop. Physical examination reveals weakness or paralysis of ankle dorsiflexion, toe extension and eversion of the foot, but inversion and plantar flexion are normal. Sensation on the dorsum of the foot, including the first dorsal web space, is diminished. The ankle reflex is preserved. Since the common fibular nerve divides at the fibular neck into the superficial and deep fibular nerves, injuries to the nerve at this level may damage either the main trunk or its branches. Electrodiagnostic studies can help localize a common fibular nerve injury to the fibular neck region. At this level, nerve conduction studies may show slowed velocities and electromyography would demonstrate denervation in the muscles innervated by the common fibular nerve (such as tibialis anterior or fibularis longus), whereas more proximally innervated muscles (particularly the short head of biceps femoris) would be normal. Injury specifically to the <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E47" id="pagebreak_1.464E47"/><a id="pg1464.e45"/>superficial fibular nerve will result in paralysis of eversion and sensory loss in the lower lateral aspect of the leg extending onto the dorsum of the foot. Damage to the deep fibular nerve results in paralysis of dorsiflexion and toe extension with sensory loss in the first interdigital web space.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1665"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1345">Superficial fibular nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2055">The superficial fibular nerve (superficial peroneal nerve) begins at the bifurcation of the common fibular nerve. It lies deep to fibularis longus at first, then passes anteroinferiorly between fibularis longus and brevis and extensor digitorum longus, and pierces the deep fascia in the distal third of the leg (see <a href="../B9780702077050000781/B9780702077050000781.xhtml#f0215">Fig. 78.41</a>). It divides into a large medial dorsal cutaneous nerve and a smaller, more laterally placed, intermediate dorsal cutaneous nerve, usually after piercing the deep fascia, but sometimes while it is still deep to the fascia. As the nerve lies between the muscles it supplies fibularis longus, fibularis brevis and the skin of the lower leg. The deep course, i.e. the compartmental localization, and the peripheral digital distribution of the superficial fibular nerve are subject to considerable variation (see Kosinksi’s classification; <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib55" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_55">Kosinski 1926</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib114" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_114">Solomon et al 2001</a>).</div><section><a id="s1670"/><section><a id="s1675"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1350">Cutaneous branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p2060">The medial dorsal cutaneous nerve passes in front of the ankle joint and divides into two dorsal digital branches; one of these supplies the medial side of the hallux and the other supplies the adjacent side of the second and third toes. It communicates with the saphenous and deep fibular nerves. The smaller intermediate branch crosses the dorsum of the foot laterally. It divides into dorsal digital branches that supply the contiguous sides of the third to fifth toes and the skin of the lateral aspect of the ankle, where it connects with the sural nerve. Both branches, especially the intermediate, are at risk during the placement of portal skin incisions for arthroscopy and during surgical approaches to the lateral malleolus. Branches of the superficial fibular nerve supply the skin of the dorsum of all the toes except that of the lateral side of the fifth toe (supplied by the sural nerve) and the adjoining sides of the great and second toes (supplied by the medial terminal branch of the deep fibular nerve). Some of the lateral branches of the superficial fibular nerve are frequently absent and are replaced by sural nerve branches.</div></section><section><a id="s1680"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1355">Accessory fibular nerves</p><div class="textfl" id="p2065">An accessory superficial fibular nerve and an accessory deep fibular nerve have been described as variant branches of the superficial fibular nerve; both are probably the product of atypical branching of the parent nerve deep to the deep fascia (see above).</div></section></section><section><a id="s1685"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1360">Lesions of the superficial fibular nerve</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2070">A lesion of the superficial fibular nerve causes weakness of foot eversion and sensory loss on the lateral aspect of the leg that extends onto the dorsum of the foot. The nerve can be subject to entrapment as it penetrates the deep fascia of the leg, be involved in compartment syndrome that affects the lateral compartment of the leg, or be damaged in severe inversion injuries of the ankle.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1690"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1365">Deep fibular nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2075">The deep fibular nerve (deep peroneal nerve) begins at the bifurcation of the common fibular nerve, between the fibula and the proximal part of fibularis longus. It passes obliquely forwards deep to extensor digitorum longus to the front of the interosseous membrane and reaches the anterior tibial artery in the proximal third of the leg. It descends with the artery to the ankle, where it divides into lateral and medial terminal branches. As it descends, the nerve is first lateral to the artery, then anterior, and finally lateral again at the ankle.</div><section><a id="s1695"/><section><a id="s1700"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1370">Cutaneous and muscular branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p2080">The deep fibular nerve supplies muscular branches to tibialis anterior, extensor hallucis longus, extensor digitorum longus and fibularis tertius, and an articular branch to the ankle joint.</div><div class="text" id="p2085">The lateral terminal branch crosses the ankle deep to extensor digitorum brevis, enlarges as a pseudoganglion and supplies extensor digitorum brevis. From the enlargement, three minute interosseous branches supply the tarsal and metatarsophalangeal joints of the middle three toes.</div><div class="text" id="p2090">The medial terminal branch runs distally on the dorsum of the foot lateral to the dorsalis pedis artery, and connects with the medial branch of the superficial fibular nerve in the first interosseous space. It divides into two dorsal digital nerves, which supply adjacent sides of the great and second toes. Before dividing, it gives off an interosseous branch, which supplies the first metatarsophalangeal joint. The deep fibular nerve may end as three terminal branches.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1705"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1375">Lesions of the deep fibular nerve</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2095">Isolated injury to the deep fibular nerve may result from compartment syndrome that affects the anterior compartment of the leg or from an intraneural ganglion cyst (mucinous cyst within the nerve derived from the superior tibiofibular joint via the articular branch that travels with the anterior tibial recurrent artery (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib115" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_115">Spinner et al 2003</a>)). The nerve is sometimes compressed by osteophytes in the region of the second tarsometatarsal joint.</div><div class="text" id="p2100">Individuals with lesions of the deep fibular nerve have weakness of ankle dorsiflexion and extension of all toes but normal foot eversion. Sensory impairment is confined to the first interdigital web space.</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s1710"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle1380">Coccygeal plexus</h3><div class="textfl" id="p2105">The coccygeal plexus is formed by a small descending branch from the fourth sacral ventral ramus and by the fifth sacral and coccygeal ventral rami. The fifth sacral ventral ramus emerges from the sacral hiatus, curves round the lateral margin of the sacrum inferior to its cornu, and pierces ischiococcygeus inferiorly to reach its pelvic surface. Here it is joined by a descending branch of the fourth sacral ventral ramus; the small trunk so formed descends on the pelvic surface of ischiococcygeus, joins the minute coccygeal ventral ramus that emerges from the sacral hiatus, and curves round the lateral coccygeal margin, piercing ischiococcygeus to reach the pelvis. The small trunk that is formed in this way is the coccygeal plexus. Anococcygeal nerves arise from it and form a few fine filaments that pierce the sacrotuberous ligament to supply the adjacent skin.</div></section><section><a id="s1715"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle1385">Autonomic Nervous System</h2><div class="textfl" id="p2110">The autonomic nervous system represents the visceral component of the nervous system. It consists of neurones located within the CNS and the PNS that are concerned with the control of the internal environment, through the innervation of secretory glands and cardiac and smooth muscle. Its functions are, however, closely integrated with those of the somatic nervous system.</div><div class="text" id="p2115">Visceral efferent pathways differ from their somatic equivalents in that the former are interrupted by peripheral synapses, there being a sequence of at least two neurones between the CNS and the target structure (see <a href="../B9780702077050000240/B9780702077050000240.xhtml#f0060">Fig. 24.11</a>). These are referred to as preganglionic and postganglionic neurones, respectively. The somata of preganglionic neurones are located in the visceral efferent nuclei of the brainstem and in the lateral horn of the spinal cord. Their axons, which are usually finely myelinated, exit from the CNS in certain cranial and spinal nerves, and then pass to peripheral ganglia, where they synapse with postganglionic neurones. The axons of postganglionic neurones are usually unmyelinated. Postganglionic neurones are more numerous than preganglionic ones; one preganglionic neurone may synapse with 15–20 postganglionic neurones, which permits the wide distribution of many autonomic effects.</div><div class="text" id="p2120">The autonomic nervous system is traditionally divided into the sympathetic and parasympathetic systems that coordinate the neural regulation of visceral and homeostatic functions. In general, sympathetic activity results in the constriction of cutaneous arteries (increasing blood supply to the heart, muscles and brain), cardiac acceleration, an increase in blood pressure, contraction of sphincters and depression of peristalsis, all of which mobilize body energy stores for dealing with increased activity. Parasympathetic activity results in cardiac slowing and an increase in intestinal glandular and peristaltic activities, which may be considered to conserve body energy stores.</div></section>


<section><a id="s1720"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle1390">Sympathetic Nervous System</h2><div class="textfl" id="p2125">Preganglionic sympathetic axons originate from neuronal somata in the intermediolateral nucleus (lateral horn) of the spinal cord from the first thoracic to the second lumbar spinal segments (T1–L2) (see <a href="../B9780702077050000240/B9780702077050000240.xhtml#f0065">Fig. 24.12</a>). Postganglionic sympathetic axons arise from neuronal somata in the sympathetic (paravertebral) trunk or in a more peripheral plexus. There are between 10 and 12 (usually 11) thoracic ganglia, four lumbar ganglia, and four or five ganglia in the sacral region. Cervical sympathetic ganglia are usually reduced to three by fusion.</div><div class="text" id="p2130">Preganglionic axons are myelinated with diameters of 1.5–4<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>μm and release acetylcholine as their principal neurotransmitter. They travel initially with the corresponding ventral roots and leave the latter as <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E48" id="pagebreak_1.464E48"/><a id="pg1464.e46"/>white rami communicantes to enter the adjacent sympathetic ganglion in the sympathetic trunk (see <a href="../B9780702077050000240/B9780702077050000240.xhtml#f0070">Fig. 24.13</a>). Their targets vary; some synapse in the sympathetic ganglion that they enter, whereas others ascend or descend in the sympathetic trunk to synapse in cervical or lumbar ganglia, respectively. Axons destined for the cervical ganglia are mainly derived from preganglionic neurones in the first thoracic spinal nerve. Many of the preganglionic axons that originate in the lower thoracic spinal segments (T5–T12) do not synapse locally but enter the abdominal cavity as the thoracic splanchnic nerves. These nerves pass through the posterior mediastinum and respiratory diaphragm to enter the abdominal cavity where they synapse either in prevertebral ganglia that surround the origin of the major visceral arteries arising from the abdominal aorta, e.g. the coeliac and superior mesenteric ganglia, or around the medullary chromaffin cells of the suprarenal gland.</div><div class="text" id="p2135">The axons of postganglionic neurones are unmyelinated and generally longer than those of preganglionic neurones, an exception being some of those that innervate pelvic viscera. Postganglionic axons are distributed to target organs in various ways. Those from a ganglion of the sympathetic trunk may return to the spinal nerve of preganglionic origin through a grey ramus communicans, which usually joins the nerve just proximal to the white ramus, and are then distributed through ventral and dorsal spinal rami to blood vessels, sweat glands, hairs, etc., in their zone of supply. Segmental areas vary in extent and overlap considerably and the extent of innervation of different effector systems, e.g. vasomotor, sudomotor, etc., by a particular nerve may differ (a single preganglionic fibre probably synapses with the postganglionic neurones in only one effector system). Alternatively, postganglionic fibres can pass in a medial branch of a ganglion direct to particular viscera, or innervate adjacent blood vessels, or pass along them externally to their peripheral distribution. They may ascend or descend before leaving the sympathetic trunk as described above. Many fibres are distributed along arteries and ducts as plexuses to distant effectors, e.g. the internal carotid nerve, a continuation of the sympathetic trunk, issues from the cranial pole of the superior ganglion and accompanies the internal carotid artery through its canal into the cranial cavity.</div><div class="text" id="p2140">The principal neurotransmitter released by postganglionic sympathetic neurones is noradrenaline (norepinephrine). The sympathetic system has a much wider distribution than the parasympathetic system: it innervates all sweat glands, the arrector pili muscles, the muscular walls of many blood vessels, the heart, lungs and respiratory tree, the abdominopelvic viscera, the oesophagus, the muscles of the iris, and the non-striated muscle of the urogenital tract, eyelids and elsewhere. Postganglionic sympathetic fibres that return to the spinal nerves are vasoconstrictor to blood vessels, secretomotor to sweat glands and motor to the arrector pili muscles within their dermatomes. Most, if not all, peripheral nerves contain postganglionic sympathetic fibres. Those reaching the viscera are concerned with general vasoconstriction, bronchial and bronchiolar dilation, modification of glandular secretion, pupillary dilation, inhibition of gastrointestinal muscle contraction, etc.</div><section><a id="s1725"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle1395">Sympathetic trunk</h3><div class="textfl" id="p2145">The sympathetic trunk is a ganglionated nerve cord that extends on the side of the vertebral column from the cranial base to the coccyx. The ganglia are joined to spinal nerves by short connecting nerves called white and grey rami communicantes. Preganglionic axons join the trunk through the white rami communicantes, while postganglionic axons leave the trunk in the grey rami. In the thorax, the trunks are anterior to the heads of the ribs, in the abdomen they lie anterolateral to the bodies of the lumbar vertebrae, and in the pelvis they are anterior to the sacrum and medial to the anterior sacral foramina. Anterior to the coccyx the two trunks meet in a single, median, terminal ganglion.</div><section><a id="s1730"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle1400">Cervical sympathetic system</h4><div class="textfl" id="p2150">In the neck, each sympathetic trunk lies posterior to the carotid sheath and anterior to the transverse processes of the cervical vertebrae. The cervical sympathetic trunk lies on the prevertebral fascia behind the carotid sheath and contains three interconnected ganglia: the superior, middle and inferior (stellate or cervicothoracic) (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0090">Figs 35.17</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0095">35.18</a>). There may occasionally, however, be two or four ganglia. The cervical sympathetic ganglia send grey rami communicantes to all the cervical spinal nerves but receive no white rami communicantes from them. Their spinal preganglionic fibres emerge in the white rami communicantes of the upper five thoracic spinal nerves (mainly the upper three), and ascend in the sympathetic trunk to synapse in the cervical ganglia. In their course, the grey rami communicantes may pierce longus capitis or scalenus anterior.</div><section><a id="s1735"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1405">Superior cervical ganglion</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2155">The superior cervical ganglion is the largest of the three ganglia (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0090">Fig. 35.17</a>). It lies on the transverse processes of the second and third cervical vertebrae and is probably formed from four fused ganglia, judging by its grey rami communicantes to the upper four cervical spinal nerves. The internal carotid artery within the carotid sheath is anterior, and longus capitis is posterior. The lower end of the ganglion is united by a connecting trunk to the middle cervical ganglion. Postganglionic branches are distributed in the internal carotid nerve, which ascends with the internal carotid artery into the carotid canal to enter the cranial cavity, and in lateral, medial and anterior branches. They supply vasoconstrictor and sudomotor nerves to the face and neck, dilator pupillae and smooth muscle in the eyelids and orbitalis.</div><section><a id="s1740"/><section><a id="s1745"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1410">Lateral branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p2160">The lateral branches of the superior cervical ganglion are grey rami communicantes to the upper four cervical spinal nerves and to some of the cranial nerves. Branches pass to the inferior vagal ganglion, the hypoglossal nerve, the superior jugular bulb and associated jugular glomus or glomera, and to the meninges in the posterior cranial fossa. Another branch, the jugular nerve, ascends to the cranial base and divides into two; one part joins the inferior glossopharyngeal ganglion and the other joins the superior vagal ganglion.</div></section><section><a id="s1750"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1415">Medial branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p2165">The medial branches of the superior cervical ganglion are the laryngopharyngeal and cardiac branches. The laryngopharyngeal branches supply the carotid body and pass to the side of the pharynx, joining glossopharyngeal and vagal rami to form the pharyngeal plexus. A cardiac branch arises by two or more filaments from the lower part of the superior cervical ganglion and occasionally receives a twig from the trunk between the superior and middle cervical ganglia. It is thought to contain only efferent fibres, the preganglionic outflow being from the upper thoracic segments of the spinal cord, and to be devoid of pain fibres from the heart. It descends behind the common carotid artery, anterior to longus colli, and crosses anterior to the inferior thyroid artery and recurrent laryngeal nerve. The courses on the two sides then differ. The right cardiac branch usually passes posterior, but sometimes anterior, to the subclavian artery and runs posterolateral to the brachiocephalic trunk to join the deep (dorsal) part of the cardiac plexus behind the aortic arch. It has other sympathetic connections. About mid-neck, it receives filaments from the external laryngeal nerve. Inferiorly, one or two vagal cardiac branches join it. As it enters the thorax, it is joined by a filament from the recurrent laryngeal nerve. Filaments from the nerve also communicate with the thyroid branches of the middle cervical ganglion. The left cardiac branch, in the thorax, is anterior to the left common carotid artery and crosses anterior to the left side of the aortic arch to reach the superficial (ventral) part of the cardiac plexus. It may descend on the right of the aorta to end in the deep (dorsal) part of the cardiac plexus. It communicates with the cardiac branches of the middle and inferior cervical sympathetic ganglia and sometimes with the inferior cervical cardiac branches of the left vagus nerve, and forms a plexus on the ascending aorta with branches from these mixed nerves</div></section><section><a id="s1755"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1420">Anterior branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p2170">The anterior branches of the superior cervical ganglion ramify on the common and external carotid arteries and the branches of the external carotid, and form a delicate plexus around each, in which small ganglia are occasionally found. The plexus around the facial artery supplies a filament to the submandibular ganglion; the plexus on the middle meningeal artery sends one ramus to the otic ganglion and another, the external petrosal nerve, to the facial ganglion. Many of the fibres coursing along the external carotid and its branches ultimately leave them to travel to facial sweat glands via branches of the trigeminal nerve.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s1760"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1425">Middle cervical ganglion</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2175">The middle cervical ganglion is the smallest of the three cervical sympathetic ganglia and is occasionally absent, in which case it may be replaced by minute ganglia in the sympathetic trunk or may be fused with the superior ganglion. It is usually found at the level of the sixth cervical vertebra, anterior or just superior to the inferior thyroid artery, or it may adjoin the inferior cervical ganglion. It probably represents a coalescence of the ganglia of the fifth and sixth cervical segments, judging by its postganglionic rami, which join the fifth and sixth cervical spinal nerves <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E49" id="pagebreak_1.464E49"/><a id="pg1464.e47"/>(but sometimes also the fourth and seventh). It is connected to the inferior cervical ganglion by two or more very variable cords. The posterior cord usually splits to enclose the vertebral artery, while the anterior cord loops down anterior to, and then below, the first part of the subclavian artery, medial to the origin of its internal thoracic branch, and supplies rami to it. This loop is the ansa subclavia and is frequently multiple, lies in close contact with the cervical pleura, and typically connects with the phrenic nerve, and sometimes with the vagus nerve (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0095">Fig. 35.18</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p2180">The middle cervical ganglion gives off thyroid and cardiac branches. The thyroid branches accompany the inferior thyroid artery to the thyroid gland. They communicate with the superior cardiac, external laryngeal and recurrent laryngeal nerves, and send branches to the parathyroid glands. Fibres to both glands are largely vasomotor but some reach the secretory cells. The cardiac branch, the largest sympathetic cardiac nerve, arises either from the ganglion itself or more often from the sympathetic trunk cranial or caudal to it. On the right side, it descends behind the common carotid artery and anterior or posterior to the subclavian artery, to the trachea, where it receives a few filaments from the recurrent laryngeal nerve before joining the right half of the deep (dorsal) part of the cardiac plexus. In the neck, it connects with the superior cardiac and recurrent laryngeal nerves. On the left side, the cardiac nerve enters the thorax between the left common carotid and subclavian arteries to join the left half of the deep (dorsal) part of the cardiac plexus. Fine branches from the middle cervical ganglion also pass to the trachea and oesophagus.</div></section><section><a id="s1765"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1430">Inferior (cervicothoracic/stellate) ganglion</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2185">The inferior cervical ganglion (cervicothoracic/stellate) is irregular in shape and much larger than the middle cervical ganglion (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0095">Figs 35.18</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000483/B9780702077050000483.xhtml#f0100">48.16</a>). It is probably formed by a fusion of the lower two cervical and first thoracic segmental ganglia, sometimes including the second and even third and fourth thoracic ganglia. The first thoracic ganglion may be separate, leaving an inferior cervical ganglion above it. The sympathetic trunk turns backwards at the junction of the neck and thorax, and so the long axis of the cervicothoracic ganglion becomes almost anteroposterior. The ganglion lies on or just lateral to the lateral border of longus colli between the base of the transverse process of the seventh cervical vertebra and the neck of the first rib (which are both posterior to it). The vertebral vessels are anterior, and the ganglion is separated from the posterior aspect of the cervical pleura inferiorly by the suprapleural membrane. The costocervical trunk of the subclavian artery branches near the lower pole of the ganglion, and the supreme intercostal artery is lateral.</div><div class="text" id="p2190">A small vertebral ganglion may be present on the sympathetic trunk anterior or anteromedial to the origin of the vertebral artery and directly superior to the subclavian artery. When present, it may provide the ansa subclavia. It is also joined to the inferior cervical ganglion by fibres enclosing the vertebral artery and is usually regarded as a detached part of the middle cervical or inferior cervical ganglion. Like the middle cervical ganglion, it may supply grey rami communicantes to the fourth and fifth cervical spinal nerves. The inferior cervical ganglion sends grey rami communicantes to the seventh and eighth cervical and first thoracic spinal nerves, and gives off a cardiac branch, branches to nearby vessels and sometimes a branch to the vagus nerve.</div><div class="text" id="p2195">The grey rami communicantes to the seventh cervical spinal nerve vary from one to five (two being the usual number). A third often ascends medial to the vertebral artery in front of the transverse process of the seventh cervical vertebra. It connects with the seventh cervical nerve, and sends a filament upwards through the transverse foramen of the sixth cervical vertebra in company with the vertebral vessels to join the sixth cervical spinal nerve as it emerges from the intervertebral foramen. An inconstant ramus may traverse the transverse foramen of the seventh cervical vertebra. Grey rami to the eighth cervical spinal nerve vary from three to six in number.</div><div class="text" id="p2200">The cardiac branch descends behind the subclavian artery and along the anterior aspect of the trachea to the deep cardiac plexus. Behind the artery, it connects with the recurrent laryngeal nerve and the cardiac branch of the middle cervical ganglion (the latter is often replaced by fine branches of the inferior cervical ganglion and ansa subclavia).</div><div class="text" id="p2205">The branches to blood vessels form plexuses on the subclavian artery and its branches. The subclavian supply is derived from the inferior cervical ganglion and ansa subclavia, and typically extends to the first part of the axillary artery, although a few fibres may extend further. An extension of the subclavian plexus to the internal thoracic artery may be joined by a branch of the phrenic nerve.</div><div class="text" id="p2210">Within the foramina transversaria and intertransverse spaces, the cervical grey rami communicantes form intersegmental arcades as they communicate with one another and the ventral rami of the upper five or six cervical spinal nerves. These arcades accompany the second part of the vertebral artery and create the appearance of a long nerve known as the vertebral nerve. Fine filaments from this nerve and the grey rami communicantes form the vertebral plexus on the surface of the vertebral artery. This plexus contains not only sympathetic efferent fibres but also somatic sensory fibres from the adventitia of the artery with cell bodies in the cervical dorsal root ganglia. The vertebral nerve sends filaments to the posterolateral corners of the cervical intervertebral discs (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib14" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_14">Bogduk et al 1988</a>), and gives rise to the meningeal branches (sinuvertebral nerves) at each cervical segment. The vertebral plexus, which contains some neuronal cell bodies, continues into the skull along the vertebral and basilar arteries and their branches as far as the posterior cerebral artery, where it meets a plexus from the internal carotid artery. The plexus on the inferior thyroid artery reaches the thyroid gland and connects with the recurrent and external laryngeal nerves, the cardiac branch of the superior cervical ganglion and the common carotid plexus.</div><section><a id="s1770"/><section><a id="s1775"/><section><a id="s1780"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1435">Horner’s syndrome</p><div class="textfl" id="p2215">Any condition or injury that destroys the sympathetic trunk ascending from the thorax through the neck into the face results in Horner’s syndrome (Bernard–Horner syndrome, oculosympathetic palsy), characterized by a drooping eyelid (ptosis), sunken globe (enophthalmos), narrow palpebral fissure, contracted pupil (meiosis), and vasodilation and lack of thermal sweating (anhydrosis) of the face on the affected side. Classically, this is seen in patients with bronchial carcinomas that have invaded the sympathetic trunk and it is a recognized complication of cervical sympathectomy or a radical neck dissection. Avulsion of the first thoracic nerve from the spinal cord may be diagnosed by development of the syndrome after closed traction lesion of the supraclavicular brachial plexus. Congenital Horner’s syndrome has been reported in association with ipsilateral internal carotid artery agenesis (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib35" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_35">Fons et al 2009</a>). Special features of congenital Horner’s syndrome are unilateral straight hair and abnormalities of iris pigmentation in one or both eyes (heterochromia iridis or heterochromia iridum), usually inherited as an autosomal dominant trait and attributed to disruption of the postganglionic sympathetic pathway producing a neurotropic dysgenesis of iris melanocytes (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib97" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_97">Rennie 2011</a>). Connections between the recurrent laryngeal nerve, the vagus and cervical sympathetic have been linked with Horner’s syndrome complicating thyroidectomy.</div></section></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s1785"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle1440">Thoracic sympathetic system</h4><div class="textfl" id="p2220">The left and right thoracic sympathetic trunks and associated ganglia (commonly 11 in number) sit posterior to the costal part of the parietal pleura on either side of the vertebral column. The majority of the thoracic sympathetic ganglia lie anterior to the head of a rib; the first thoracic and inferior cervical ganglia are fused, and the inferior two or three thoracic ganglia are often located lateral to their correspondingly numbered vertebral bodies (see <a href="../B9780702077050000562/B9780702077050000562.xhtml#f0030">Fig. 56.6</a>). A tumour of the superior pulmonary sulcus (apex of lung) may compress the ventral ramus of the first thoracic spinal nerve, the cervicothoracic ganglion or the sympathetic trunk (see <a href="../B9780702077050000549/B9780702077050000549.xhtml#f0015">Fig. 54.2</a>) resulting in a loss of sympathetic innervation to the ipsilateral side of the head (Horner’s syndrome) (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib84" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_84">Nikolaos et al 2014</a>) and pain radiating to the medial aspect of the ipsilateral forearm (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib18" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_18">Bruzzi et al 2008</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p2225">Preganglionic sympathetic axons originate from neuronal somata in the intermediolateral nucleus (lateral horn) of the spinal cord from T1 to L2. They travel initially with the corresponding ventral roots (rami) and leave the latter as white rami communicantes to enter the adjacent sympathetic ganglion in the sympathetic trunk. Their targets vary; some synapse in the sympathetic ganglion that they enter, whereas others ascend or descend in the sympathetic trunk to synapse in cervical or lumbar ganglia, respectively. Many of the preganglionic axons that originate in the lower thoracic spinal segments (T5–T12) do not synapse locally but enter the abdominal cavity as the thoracic splanchnic nerves. These nerves pass through the posterior mediastinum and respiratory diaphragm to enter the abdominal cavity where they synapse either in prevertebral ganglia that surround the origin of the major visceral arteries arising from the abdominal aorta, e.g. the coeliac and superior mesenteric ganglia, or around the medullary chromaffin cells of the suprarenal gland. Axons destined for the cervical ganglia are mainly derived from preganglionic neurones in the first thoracic spinal nerve.</div><section><a id="s1790"/><section><a id="s1795"/><section><a id="s1800"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1445">Greater thoracic splanchnic nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p2230">On each side, the greater thoracic splanchnic nerve is derived from the medial, branches of the fifth to ninth thoracic ganglia. It gives off branches to the descending thoracic aorta and enters the abdomen through the fibres of the ipsilateral crus of the respiratory diaphragm, on which it descends anteroinferiorly. The main trunk of the nerve enters the superior aspect of the coeliac ganglion, where most of the <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E50" id="pagebreak_1.464E50"/><a id="pg1464.e48"/>preganglionic fibres synapse (but not those destined for the medulla of the suprarenal gland).</div></section><section><a id="s1805"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1450">Lesser thoracic splanchnic nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p2235">On each side, the lesser thoracic splanchnic nerve is derived from the medial branches of the tenth and eleventh (or ninth and tenth) thoracic ganglia. It enters the abdomen running through the most inferior fibres of the ipsilateral crus of the respiratory diaphragm or under the medial arcuate ligament, and then lies on the crus as it runs anteroinferiorly. The trunk of the nerve joins the aorticorenal ganglion and may give branches to the lateral aspect of the coeliac ganglion. It occasionally joins the greater and least splanchnic nerves as a single splanchnic nerve.</div></section><section><a id="s1810"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1455">Least thoracic splanchnic nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p2240">On each side, the least thoracic splanchnic nerve is derived from the medial branches of the eleventh and/or twelfth thoracic ganglion. It enters the abdomen medial to the sympathetic trunk under the medial arcuate ligament of the respiratory diaphragm and runs inferiorly to join the renal plexus. The trunk of the nerve enters the aorticorenal ganglion and may give branches to the lateral aspect of the coeliac ganglion. It is sometimes part of the lesser splanchnic nerve, when it forms a twig that enters the renal plexus just below the aorticorenal ganglion.</div><div class="text" id="p2245">The thoracic splanchnic nerves show considerable individual variation in their origin and distribution (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib65" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_65">Loukas et al 2010</a>). For example, the greater splanchnic nerve can receive a contribution from the fourth or tenth thoracic ganglion of the sympathetic trunk or originate only from the sixth to ninth ganglia.</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s1815"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle1460">Lumbar sympathetic system</h4><div class="textfl" id="p2250">The lumbar part of each sympathetic trunk usually contains four ganglia lying on the anterolateral aspects of the lumbar vertebrae along the medial margin of psoas major (see <a href="../B9780702077050000598/B9780702077050000598.xhtml#f0015">Figs 59.2</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000598/B9780702077050000598.xhtml#f0025">59.4</a>) (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib78" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_78">Murata et al 2003</a>). Superiorly, it is continuous with the thoracic part of the sympathetic trunk posterior to the medial arcuate ligament. Inferiorly, it passes posterior to the common iliac vessels and is continuous with the sacral part of the sympathetic trunk. On the right side, it lies posterior to the inferior vena cava; on the left, it is posterior to the lateral aortic nodes. It is anterior to most of the lumbar vessels but may pass behind some lumbar veins.</div><div class="text" id="p2255">On each side, the first, second and sometimes the third lumbar ventral rami are connected to the lumbar part of the sympathetic trunk by white rami communicantes. All lumbar ventral rami are joined near their origins by long, slender, grey rami communicantes from the four lumbar ganglia. Their arrangement is irregular: one ganglion can give rami to two or three lumbar ventral rami, one lumbar ventral ramus can receive rami from two ganglia, or grey rami can leave the sympathetic trunk between ganglia (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib78" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Murata et al 2003</a>).</div><section><a id="s1820"/><section><a id="s1825"/><section><a id="s1830"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1465">Somatic and vascular branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p2260">Sympathetic nerve branches accompany the lumbar arteries round the sides of the vertebral bodies, medial to the fibrous arches to which psoas major is attached, to provide sympathetic innervation to the segmental distribution of the lumbar arteries. Branches from the lumbar ganglia innervate the abdominal aorta and common, external and internal iliac arteries, forming delicate nerve plexuses that extend along the vessels. Other postganglionic sympathetic nerves to vessels and skin travel with somatic nerves. Thus, the femoral nerve carries vasoconstrictor sympathetic nerves to the femoral artery and its branches in the thigh, as well as sympathetic fibres in its cutaneous branches. Postganglionic fibres travelling with the obturator nerve supply the obturator artery and a variable patch of skin of the medial thigh. Sympathetic denervation of vessels in the lower limb can occur by removing or ablating the proximal three lumbar ganglia and intervening parts of the sympathetic trunk; this procedure can be useful for treating some varieties of vascular insufficiency of the lower limb.</div></section><section><a id="s1835"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1470">Lumbar splanchnic nerves</p><div class="textfl" id="p2265">Four lumbar splanchnic nerves pass as medial branches from the ganglia to join the coeliac, inferior mesenteric and superior hypogastric plexuses (see <a href="../B9780702077050000598/B9780702077050000598.xhtml#f0025">Fig. 59.4</a>). The first lumbar splanchnic nerve, from the first ganglion of the lumbar part of the sympathetic trunk, gives branches to the coeliac, renal and inferior mesenteric plexuses. The second lumbar splanchnic nerve joins the inferior part of the intermesenteric or inferior mesenteric plexus. The third lumbar splanchnic arises from the third or fourth ganglion and joins the superior hypogastric plexus. The fourth lumbar splanchnic nerve from the lowest ganglion joins the distal part of the superior hypogastric plexus, or the hypogastric nerves. It is important to note that lumbar splanchnic nerves contribute to the superior and inferior hypogastric plexuses and therefore to the innervation of the neck of the urinary bladder, ductus deferens and prostate, among other structures. Injury to these nerves, e.g. during aortoiliac surgery, can result in sexual dysfunction.</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s1840"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle1475">Pelvic sympathetic system</h4><div class="textfl" id="p2270">The sacral part of the sympathetic trunk supplies the pelvic organs and vascular system. It usually consists of four or five interconnected ganglia located medial or anterior to the anterior sacral foramina beneath the presacral fascia (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib86" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_86">Oh et al 2004</a>) (see <a href="../B9780702077050000719/B9780702077050000719.xhtml#f0045">Fig. 71.11</a>). Occasionally, one or two coccygeal ganglia are present. The first sacral ganglion is the largest and succeeding ganglia become progressively smaller (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib12" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_12">Blaszczyk 1981</a>). The sacral sympathetic trunk is often asymmetric, with absent or fused ganglia, and cross-communications between sides are frequent. Each ganglion sends at least one grey ramus communicans to its adjacent spinal nerve but up to eleven such branches from a single ganglion have been reported (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib91" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_91">Potts 1925</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p2275">Superiorly, the sacral part of the sympathetic trunk is continuous with the lumbar part of the sympathetic trunk, and preganglionic fibres descend from the distal lumbar spinal cord segments via this route. The right and left trunks converge distal to the most inferior ganglia and unite to form a solitary retroperitoneal structure, the ganglion impar (ganglion of Walther), which lies at a variable level between the sacrococcygeal joint and the tip of the coccyx; it is occasionally paired, unilateral or absent (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib86" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Oh et al 2004</a>). Grey rami communicantes pass from the ganglia to sacral and coccygeal spinal nerves and there are no white rami communicantes. Medial branches connect across the midline, and twigs from the first two ganglia join the inferior hypogastric plexus or the hypogastric nerve. Other branches form a plexus on the median sacral artery.</div><div class="text" id="p2280">Nociceptive afferents from the perineum and terminal urogenital regions pass to the ganglion impar and the sacral parasympathetic trunks: anaesthetic blockade of the ganglion impar can be used to treat intractable perineal pain carried by visceral afferent fibres in patients with pelvic cancers (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib119" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_119">Toshniwal et al 2007</a>).</div><section><a id="s1845"/><section><a id="s1850"/><section><a id="s1855"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1480">Vascular branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p2285">Preganglionic fibres for the vessels supplying the pelvis and lower limb are derived from the lower three thoracic and upper two or three lumbar spinal cord segments. They reach the lower thoracic and upper lumbar ganglia through white rami communicantes and descend through the sympathetic trunk to synapse in the lumbar ganglia. Postganglionic fibres pass from these ganglia via grey rami communicantes to the second, third and fourth lumbar ventral rami and then to the femoral nerve, which carries them to the femoral artery and its branches. Some fibres descend through the lumbar ganglia to synapse in the upper two or three sacral ganglia, from which postganglionic axons pass through grey rami communicantes to the roots of the sacral plexus. Those in the pudendal and superior and inferior gluteal nerves accompany the arteries of the same name to the gluteal and perineal tissues; branches can also supply the pelvic nodes. Those joining the tibial nerve are carried to the popliteal artery and are distributed via its branches to the leg and foot.</div><div class="text" id="p2290">Sympathetic denervation of vessels in the lower limb is used, rarely, for treating vascular insufficiency of the lower limb; it can be effected by removing or ablating the upper three lumbar sympathetic ganglia and the intervening parts of the sympathetic trunk.</div></section><section><a id="s1860"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1485">Sacral splanchnic nerves</p><div class="textfl" id="p2295">Sacral splanchnic nerves pass directly from the ganglia of the sacral part of the sympathetic trunk to the inferior hypogastric plexus and, from there, to pelvic viscera; they usually arise from the first two sacral ganglia.</div></section></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s1865"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle1490">Autonomic innervation of the limbs</h3><div class="textfl" id="p2300">The autonomic nerve supply to the limbs is exclusively sympathetic. The preganglionic sympathetic inflow to the upper limb is derived from neurones in the intermediolateral nucleus of spinal cord segments from T2 to T6/7. Myelinated preganglionic axons pass from the spinal nerves to the thoracic sympathetic trunk via white rami communicates and pass up the trunk to the middle cervical and inferior cervical (stellate or cervicothoracic) ganglia, where they relay. The unmyelinated postganglionic fibres are distributed by grey rami communicantes to the nerves of origin of the brachial plexus; innervation is particularly rich in the palmar skin of the hand and in the skin of the axilla. C5 and C6 receive grey rami from the middle cervical <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E51" id="pagebreak_1.464E51"/><a id="pg1464.e49"/>ganglion; C7 and C8 receive grey rami from the inferior cervical ganglion; T1 not only receives a grey ramus from the inferior cervical ganglion but also contributes a white ramus to it (see <a href="../B9780702077050000483/B9780702077050000483.xhtml#f0100">Fig. 48.16</a>). Interruption of this white ramus is one cause of Horner’s (Bernard–Horner) syndrome.</div><div class="text" id="p2305">The preganglionic sympathetic outflow to the lower limb is derived from neurones in the intermediolateral nucleus of spinal cord segments T10–T12 and L1, L2. Fibres pass in white rami communicantes to the sympathetic trunk and synapse in the lumbar and sacral ganglia. Postganglionic fibres pass in grey rami communicantes to enter the lumbar and sacral plexuses; many are distributed to the skin via the cutaneous branches of the nerves derived from these plexuses. Blood vessels to the lower limb receive their sympathetic nerve supply via adjacent peripheral nerves. Postganglionic fibres accompanying the iliac arteries are destined mainly for the pelvis but may supply vessels in the proximal thigh</div></section></section>


<section><a id="s1870"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle1495">Parasympathetic Nervous System</h2><div class="textfl" id="p2310">Preganglionic parasympathetic neurones are located in the Edinger–Westphal and superior and inferior salivatory nuclei in the brainstem (see <a href="../B9780702077050000288/B9780702077050000288.xhtml#f0020">Fig. 28.3</a>) and in the intermediate grey matter of the second to fourth sacral segments of the spinal cord. Their axons, which are myelinated, emerge from the CNS only in the oculomotor, facial, glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves, and as the pelvic splanchnic nerves in the second to fourth sacral spinal nerves. Preganglionic parasympathetic neurones are cholinergic. The somata of postganglionic parasympathetic neurones are mostly sited distant from the CNS, either in discrete ganglia located near the structures innervated, or dispersed in the walls of viscera.</div><section><a id="s1875"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle1500">Cranial part of the parasympathetic system</h3><div class="textfl" id="p2315">The cranial part of the parasympathetic system contains four small paired peripheral ganglia, ciliary, pterygopalatine, submandibular and otic, in which preganglionic axons relay. (These efferent parasympathetic ganglia are unlike the trigeminal, facial, glossopharyngeal and vagal sensory ganglia, all of which are concerned exclusively with afferent impulses and contain the cell bodies of sensory neurones.) The cranial parasympathetic ganglia are also traversed by afferent fibres, postganglionic sympathetic fibres and, in the case of the otic ganglion, by branchial efferent fibres; however, none of these fibres synapses in the ganglia. Postganglionic parasympathetic fibres are usually unmyelinated and shorter than their counterparts in the sympathetic system because the ganglia in which the parasympathetic fibres synapse are either in or near the viscera they supply. Postganglionic parasympathetic neurones are cholinergic. In the head, parasympathetic fibres are secretomotor to the lacrimal and parotid, submandibular and sublingual salivary glands and innervate intraocular smooth muscle (sphincter pupillae and the ciliary muscle).</div><section><a id="s1880"/><section><a id="s1885"/><h4 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1505">Otic ganglion</h4><div class="textfl" id="p2320">The otic ganglion is a small (major diameter 3–4<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm), oval, flat reddish-grey ganglion situated just below the foramen ovale. It is a peripheral parasympathetic ganglion related topographically to the mandibular nerve but connected functionally with the glossopharyngeal nerve (see <a href="../B9780702077050000422/B9780702077050000422.xhtml#f0060">Fig. 42.11</a>). Near its junction with the trigeminal motor root, the mandibular nerve lies lateral to the ganglion, tensor veli palatini lies medially, separating the ganglion from the cartilaginous part of the pharyngotympanic tube, and the middle meningeal artery is posterior to the ganglion. The otic ganglion usually surrounds the origin of the nerve to medial pterygoid. It has three roots, parasympathetic motor, sympathetic and sensory: only the parasympathetic fibres relay in the ganglion (see <a href="../B9780702077050000331/B9780702077050000331.xhtml#f0050">Fig. 33.7</a>). The parasympathetic fibres arise from cell bodies in the inferior salivatory nucleus and travel in the lesser petrosal branch of the glossopharyngeal nerve. The lesser petrosal nerve runs intracranially in the middle cranial fossa on the anterior surface of the petrous temporal bone and passes through either the foramen ovale or the sphenopetrosal fissure or the innominate canal of Arnold (a canal in the greater wing of the sphenoid close to the foramen spinosum), to join the otic ganglion where it synapses. Postganglionic fibres pass by a communicating branch to the auriculotemporal nerve to reach the parotid gland. The sympathetic root arises from a plexus on the middle meningeal artery. It contains postganglionic vasomotor fibres from the superior cervical sympathetic ganglion that pass through the otic ganglion and join the parasympathetic fibres to travel via the auriculotemporal nerve to the parotid gland. Sensory fibres from the parotid gland are derived from the auriculotemporal nerve. Clinical observations suggest that in humans the parotid gland also receives secretomotor parasympathetic fibres through the chorda tympani.</div><section><a id="s1890"/><section><a id="s1895"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1510">Branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p2325">The otic ganglion is connected by branches to the chorda tympani nerve and the nerve of the pterygoid canal. These branches may form an additional pathway by which gustatory fibres from the anterior two-thirds of the tongue reach the geniculate ganglion without passing through the middle ear: they do not synapse in the otic ganglion. Motor branches to tensor veli palatini and tensor tympani, derived from the nerve to medial pterygoid, pass through the ganglion without synapsing. (For further reading, see <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib108" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_108">Senger et al (2014)</a>.)</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s1900"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1515">Ciliary ganglion</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2330">The ciliary ganglion is a parasympathetic ganglion concerned with the innervation of the ciliary muscle and sphincter pupillae. It is a small, flat, reddish-grey swelling, 1–2<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm in diameter, connected to the nasociliary nerve, and located near the apex of the orbit in loose fat approximately 1<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm in front of the medial end of the superior orbital fissure. It lies between the optic nerve and lateral rectus, usually lateral to the ophthalmic artery. Its neurones, which are multipolar, are larger than those found in typical autonomic ganglia; a very small number of more typical neurones are also present.</div><div class="text" id="p2335">Its connections or roots (motor, sensory and sympathetic) enter or leave the ganglion posteriorly (see <a href="../B9780702077050000446/B9780702077050000446.xhtml#f0110">Fig. 44.18</a>). Eight to ten delicate filaments, termed the short ciliary nerves, emerge anteriorly from the ganglion, arranged in two or three bundles, the lower being larger. They run forwards sinuously with the ciliary arteries, above and below the optic nerve, and divide into 15–20 branches that pierce the sclera around the optic nerve and run in small grooves on the internal scleral surface. They convey parasympathetic, sympathetic and sensory fibres between the eyeball and the ciliary ganglion; only the parasympathetic fibres synapse in the ganglion.</div><div class="text" id="p2340">The parasympathetic root, derived from the branch of the oculomotor nerve to the inferior oblique, consists of preganglionic fibres from the Edinger–Westphal nucleus, which relay in the ganglion. Postganglionic fibres travel in the short ciliary nerves to the sphincter pupillae and ciliary muscle. More than 95% of these fibres supply the ciliary muscle, which is much the larger muscle in volume.</div><div class="text" id="p2345">The sympathetic root contains fibres from the plexus around the internal carotid artery within the cavernous sinus. These postganglionic fibres, derived from the superior cervical ganglion, form a fine branch that enters the orbit through the superior orbital fissure inside the common tendinous ring. The fibres may pass directly to the ganglion, or may join the nasociliary nerve and travel to the ganglion in its sensory root; either way, they traverse the ganglion without synapsing to emerge into the short ciliary nerves and are distributed to the blood vessels of the eyeball. Sympathetic fibres innervating dilator pupillae may sometimes travel via the short ciliary nerves (rather than the more usual route via the ophthalmic, nasociliary and long ciliary nerves).</div><div class="text" id="p2350">The sensory fibres that pass through the ciliary ganglion are derived from the nasociliary nerve. They enter the short ciliary nerves and carry sensation from the cornea, the ciliary body and the iris.</div></section><section><a id="s1905"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1520">Pterygopalatine ganglion</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2355">The pterygopalatine ganglion, known colloquially as the ‘ganglion of hay fever’, is the largest of the peripheral parasympathetic ganglia, and is well protected, deep in the pterygopalatine fossa. Immediately anterior to the pterygoid canal, the ganglion lies below and medial to the foramen rotundum and the maxillary nerve and lateral to the sphenopalatine foramen (see <a href="../B9780702077050000380/B9780702077050000380.xhtml#f0085">Fig. 38.30B</a>). It is flattened and reddish-grey in colour and lies just below the maxillary nerve as it crosses the pterygopalatine fossa. The majority of the ‘branches’ of the ganglion are connected with it morphologically but not functionally, because they are primarily sensory branches of the maxillary nerve and so pass through the ganglion without synapsing to enter the ganglionic branches of the maxillary nerve.</div><div class="text" id="p2360">The deep petrosal nerve (postganglionic sympathetic fibres) and the greater petrosal nerve (preganglionic parasympathetic fibres) converge to form the nerve of the pterygoid canal (the Vidian nerve in the Vidian canal). This nerve is an important landmark to the petrous portion of the internal carotid artery, and rarely can be transected to treat intractable rhinorrhoea. The pterygoid canal enters the pterygopalatine fossa, where the nerve of the pterygoid canal joins the pterygopalatine ganglion posteriorly and the parasympathetic fibres synapse on postganglionic neurones.</div><div class="text" id="p2365">Some postganglionic parasympathetic fibres may join the maxillary nerve via a ganglionic branch and then travel via its zygomatic and zygomaticotemporal branches to the lacrimal gland, but most are thought to travel by orbital branches to the gland. The parasympathetic supply to <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E52" id="pagebreak_1.464E52"/><a id="pg1464.e50"/>the preocular part of the central artery of the retina is believed to be derived mainly from the pterygopalatine ganglion and is vasodilatory. Preganglionic secretomotor fibres of uncertain origin also travel in the nerve of the pterygoid canal and synapse in the pterygopalatine ganglion: postganglionic fibres are distributed to palatine, pharyngeal and nasal mucous glands via palatine and nasal branches of the maxillary nerve.</div><div class="text" id="p2370">Postganglionic sympathetic fibres pass through the ganglion without synapsing. They arise in the superior cervical ganglion and travel via the internal carotid plexus and deep petrosal nerve to enter the pterygopalatine ganglion within the nerve of the pterygoid canal: they supply blood vessels and orbitalis. General sensory fibres destined for distribution via orbital, nasopalatine, superior alveolar, palatine and pharyngeal branches of the maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve also run through the ganglion without synapsing.</div></section><section><a id="s1915"/><section><a id="s1920"/><section><a id="s1910"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1525">Orbital branches of the pterygopalatine ganglion</p><div class="textfl" id="p2375">Several rami orbitales arise dorsally from the pterygopalatine ganglion and enter the orbit through the inferior orbital fissure. Branches leave the orbit through the posterior ethmoidal air sinus. There is strong experimental evidence from animal studies that postganglionic parasympathetic branches pass directly to the lacrimal gland, ophthalmic artery and choroid.</div><section><a id="s1925"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1530">Lacrimation reflex</p><div class="textfl" id="p2380">The lacrimal gland is innervated by secretomotor postganglionic parasympathetic fibres from the pterygopalatine ganglion. They reach the gland either via zygomatic and lacrimal branches of the maxillary nerve, or by passing directly from the ganglion (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib102" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_102">Ruskell 2004</a>). Postganglionic sympathetic fibres from the superior cervical ganglion supply the lacrimal gland and may be involved in the regulation of blood flow and the modulation of gland secretion (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib24" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_24">Dartt 2009</a>). The lacrimation reflex produces a significant increase in tear volume and is elicited by thermal, mechanical or chemical stimulation of polymodal nociceptors in the conjunctiva and cornea (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib112" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_112">Situ and Simpson 2010</a>). The afferent limb of the reflex involves branches of the ophthalmic nerve, with an additional contribution from the infraorbital nerve if the conjunctiva of the lower eyelid is involved. Corneal afferents travelling in these nerves terminate in the nucleus of the spinal tract of the trigeminal nerve: experimental tract tracing studies in animals have implicated the transition between the trigeminal subnuclei caudalis and interpolaris as an important area that projects to preganglionic parasympathetic neurones lying close to or within the superior salivatory nucleus and to the facial motor nucleus, both regions involved in the efferent limb of the blinking reflex (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib73" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_73">Meng and Kurose 2013</a>). The neural mechanism for controlling and maintaining basal tear production is less clear. Lacrimation may also occur in response to emotional triggers without any irritation of ocular structures, when it may be accompanied by alterations in the mimetic facial muscles, vocalizations and sobbing (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib40" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_40">Gračanin et al 2014</a>): emotional lacrimation is thought to be mediated by limbic projections to the superior salivatory nucleus.</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s1930"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1535">Submandibular ganglion</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2385">The submandibular ganglion is a small, fusiform body that lies on the upper part of hyoglossus, superior to the deep part of the submandibular gland and inferior to the lingual nerve, to which it is connected by several filaments. The posterior filament is the motor, parasympathetic root that conveys preganglionic fibres from the superior salivatory nucleus in the brainstem via the facial, chorda tympani and lingual nerves to the ganglion, where they synapse. Five or six postganglionic secretomotor branches from the ganglion supply the submandibular gland and its duct, and the sublingual and anterior lingual glands, by travelling either through the anterior filaments that connect the submandibular gland to the lingual nerve or along adjacent blood vessels to their targets. Neuronal cell bodies and small ganglia have been described in the interlobular connective tissue stroma of human submandibular ganglia, close to salivary parenchymal cells and blood vessels (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib120" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_120">Tosios et al 2010</a>). The sympathetic root is derived from the plexus on the facial artery and consists of postganglionic fibres from the superior cervical ganglion that traverse the submandibular ganglion without synapsing. These fibres are vasomotor to the blood vessels of the submandibular and sublingual glands. Sensory fibres derived from the lingual nerve may also pass through the ganglion.</div></section><section><a id="s1935"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1540">Parasympathetic components of the vagus nerve</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2390">Preganglionic parasympathetic axons destined for the thoracic viscera travel in the pulmonary, cardiac and oesophageal branches of the vagus nerve (see <a href="../B9780702077050000562/B9780702077050000562.xhtml#f0035">Fig. 56.7</a>) and synapse in minute ganglia in the walls of the target viscera. Axons travelling in cardiac branches join the cardiac plexuses and synapse in ganglia distributed over both atria, the interatrial septum and perinodal subepicardial tissue: when stimulated, they normally slow the cardiac cycle and constrict coronary arteries, although low-level stimulation may increase heart rate. Pulmonary branches contain axons that synapse in ganglia of the pulmonary plexuses: they are motor (bronchoconstrictor) to the circular non-striated muscle fibres of the bronchi and bronchioles, and secretomotor to the mucous glands of the respiratory epithelium.</div><div class="text" id="p2395">The parasympathetic neurones that innervate viscera in the abdomen and pelvis lie either in the dorsal nucleus of the vagus nerve or in the intermediolateral grey matter of the second, third and fourth sacral spinal cord segments. The vagus supplies preganglionic parasympathetic innervation to the abdominal viscera as far as the distal transverse colon, i.e. it supplies derivatives of the foregut and midgut. Derivatives of the hindgut are supplied by parasympathetic fibres travelling via the pelvic splanchnic nerves; the overlap between these two supplies is variable. The vagal trunks are derived from the oesophageal plexus and enter the abdomen via the oesophageal hiatus, closely related to the anterior and posterior walls of the abdominal part of the oesophagus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000562/B9780702077050000562.xhtml#f0030">Fig. 56.6</a>). The anterior vagal trunk is mostly derived from the left vagus and the posterior vagal trunk from the right vagus. The nerves supply the abdominal part of the oesophagus and stomach directly. The anterior vagal trunk gives off a hepatic branch, which innervates the liver and its vasculature, including the gallbladder and bile ducts, and the other structures in the free edge of the lesser omentum (hepatoduodenal ligament). The posterior vagal trunk supplies branches to the coeliac plexus and these fibres frequently constitute the largest portion of the fibres that contribute to the plexus. They arise directly from the posterior vagal trunk and from its gastric branch, and run beneath the peritoneum, deep to the posterior wall of the superior part of the omental bursa, to reach the coeliac plexus. Their synaptic relays with postganglionic neurones are situated in the myenteric (Auerbach’s) and submucosal (Meissner’s) plexuses in the wall of the hollow viscera.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s1940"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle1545">Pelvic splanchnic nerves</h3><div class="textfl" id="p2400">Pelvic splanchnic nerves (nervi erigentes) travel in the ventral rami of the second, third and fourth sacral spinal nerves. They leave the nerves as they exit the anterior sacral foramina and pass in the presacral tissue as a fine network of branches distributed to three principal destinations. Most pass anterolaterally into the inferior hypogastric plexus (see below). Some join the hypogastric nerves and ascend out of the pelvis as far as the superior hypogastric plexus, from where they are distributed with branches of the inferior mesenteric artery. A few run superolaterally in the presacral fascia, over the linea terminalis anterior to the left iliac vessels, and pass directly into the tissue of the retroperitoneum toward the sigmoid and descending colons. The pelvic splanchnic nerves are motor to the smooth muscle of the derivatives of the hindgut and the wall of the urinary bladder, are vasodilator to the erectile tissues of the penis and clitoris, and are secretomotor to the derivatives of the hindgut.</div><div class="text" id="p2405">An experimental study of the differential expression of transcription factors in embryonic mice has argued that thoracic and sacral pools of preganglionic neurones share a common sympathetic identity and that the sacral autonomic outflow should therefore be regarded as sympathetic (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib32" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_32">Espinosa-Medina et al 2016</a>). This controversial view has been challenged (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib46" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_46">Horn 2018</a>).</div></section></section><section><a id="s1945"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle1550">Autonomic Plexuses</h2><div class="textfl" id="p2410">The autonomic nervous system in the thorax consists of the right and left sympathetic trunks and left and right vagus nerves, and the cardiac, oesophageal and pulmonary plexuses (see <a href="../B9780702077050000562/B9780702077050000562.xhtml#f0030">Figs 56.6</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000562/B9780702077050000562.xhtml#f0035">56.7</a>). The autonomic supply to the abdominal and pelvic viscera is via the abdominopelvic part of the sympathetic trunk and the greater, lesser and least splanchnic nerves (sympathetic), and the vagus and pelvic splanchnic nerves (parasympathetic).</div><div class="text" id="p2415">The somata of preganglionic sympathetic neurones are located in the intermediolateral grey matter (lamina VII) of the thoracolumbar segments of the spinal cord; those destined for the smooth muscle of the wall of the hollow viscera mostly pass through the sympathetic trunk without synapsing and relay in prevertebral ganglia (coeliac, mesenteric and pelvic). Postganglionic sympathetic fibres are distributed with the branches of the coeliac trunk and mesenteric arteries to three principal targets: the myenteric and submucosal ganglia (causing inhibition); blood vessels (inducing vasoconstriction); and sphincter muscles (inducing contraction). The neuronal somata of preganglionic parasympathetic axons are found in the dorsal nucleus of the vagus nerve in the medulla oblongata and in the second to fourth sacral segments of the spinal cord. <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E53" id="pagebreak_1.464E53"/><a id="pg1464.e51"/>Their main targets in the wall of the hollow viscera are the enteric neurones of the myenteric plexus. The vagus nerve plays a major role in oesophageal propulsion, gastric acid secretion and emptying of the stomach, gallbladder contraction and pancreatic exocrine secretion. Pelvic splanchnic nerves innervate the distal colon and rectum.</div><div class="text" id="p2420">There are numerous interconnections between plexuses and ganglia, particularly in the major plexuses around the abdominal aorta and therefore descriptions, as here, are simplifications based on the ‘main’ supply to each organ (see <a href="../B9780702077050000598/B9780702077050000598.xhtml#f0015">Fig. 59.2</a>).</div><section><a id="s1950"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle1555">Thoracic plexuses</h3><section><a id="s1955"/><section><a id="s1960"/><h4 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1560">Cardiac plexus</h4><div class="textfl" id="p2425">The cardiac plexus has a superficial component inferior to the aortic arch, lying between the arch and the pulmonary trunk, and a deep part between the aortic arch and tracheal bifurcation (see <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0110">Fig. 57.61</a>). The plexus has coronary, pulmonary, atrial and aortic extensions. The superficial (ventral) part is formed by the cardiac branch of the left superior cervical sympathetic ganglion and the inferior of the two cervical cardiac branches of the left vagus nerve. The deep (dorsal) part is formed by the cardiac branches of the cervical and upper thoracic sympathetic ganglia and of the vagus and recurrent laryngeal nerves. The only cardiac nerves that do not join it are those that join the superficial part of the plexus. Branches from the cardiac plexuses subsequently form the left and right coronary and atrial plexuses.</div></section><section><a id="s1965"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1565">Pulmonary plexus</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2430">The autonomic nervous system (either by direct axonal innervation or circulating neurotransmitter) controls many aspects of airway function, including regulation of airway smooth muscle tone, mucus secretion from submucosal glands and surface epithelial goblet cells, vascular permeability and blood flow (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib8" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_8">Belvisi 2002</a>). The trachea and bronchi are innervated by branches of the vagus nerves, recurrent laryngeal nerves and sympathetic trunks via the anterior and posterior pulmonary plexuses. The plexuses are interconnected and lie anterior and posterior to the structures of the lung root and hilum (see <a href="../B9780702077050000562/B9780702077050000562.xhtml#f0030">Figs 56.6</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000562/B9780702077050000562.xhtml#f0035">56.7</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0110">57.61</a>). The posterior plexus provides the majority of the autonomic innervation to the lung and is formed by approximately 12 (8–18) branches from the vagus nerve (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib132" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_132">Weijs et al 2015</a>) and cardiac branches from the second to fifth (or sixth) thoracic sympathetic ganglia. The smaller anterior plexus is formed by 3 (2–4) branches of the vagus nerve and cervical sympathetic cardiac nerves via the superficial and deep parts of the cardiac plexus. Branches of the recurrent laryngeal nerves form a plexus on the membranous posterior wall of the trachea; the plexus primarily innervates the trachea and proximal parts of the main bronchi, with branches to the oesophagus.</div><div class="text" id="p2435">Efferent preganglionic parasympathetic nerves from the vagus nerve synapse on small ganglia within the walls of the tracheobronchial tree, likely acting as sites of integration and/or modulation of the input from extrinsic nerves or permitting local control of aspects of airway function by local reflex mechanisms. The predominant contractile innervation of airway smooth muscle is parasympathetic cholinergic, while the primary relaxant innervation of the airways is non-cholinergic (parasympathetic nerves containing nitric oxide synthase and vasoactive intestinal peptide). These parasympathetic nerves are anatomically and physiologically distinct from one another and differentially regulated by reflexes. Stimulation of cholinergic nerves also results in mucus secretion and bronchial vasodilation. Sympathetic-adrenergic nerves play little, if any, role in directly regulating smooth muscle tone in the human airways, although they may control constriction of tracheobronchial blood vessels. Circulating noradrenaline (norepinephrine) can bring about bronchodilation through activation of β-adrenergic receptors in the airways. Extrapulmonary afferents may modulate neurally mediated regulation of airway smooth muscle tone (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib20" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_20">Canning and Fischer 2001</a>). Vagal innervation is involved in the cough reflex, mucous production and control of bronchial diameter; inadvertent transection of the pulmonary vagal nerves during oesophagectomy may be related to the high incidence of postoperative pneumonia and pulmonary complications following oesophagectomy (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib134" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_134">Weijs et al 2017</a>); preservation of vagal pulmonary branches is therefore desirable (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib133" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_133">Weijs et al 2016</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s1970"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1570">Oesophageal plexus</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2440">The oesophageal plexus surrounds the oesophagus below the level of the hila of the lungs (see <a href="../B9780702077050000562/B9780702077050000562.xhtml#f0030">Fig. 56.6</a>). Preganglionic parasympathetic axons from the vagus and recurrent laryngeal nerves travel to ganglia in the oesophageal wall, either directly or through the oesophageal plexus, and are motor to the smooth muscle in the lower oesophagus and secretomotor to mucous glands in the oesophageal mucosa. Vasomotor sympathetic axons arise from the first to sixth (sometimes fewer) thoracic segments of the spinal cord. Those passing from the more superior cord segments often synapse in the middle and inferior cervical sympathetic ganglia; their postganglionic axons are vasomotor to the vessels of the cervical and superior part of the thoracic oesophagus. Preganglionic axons from the fifth or sixth thoracic spinal cord segments pass directly to the oesophageal plexus or to the coeliac ganglion, where they synapse; postganglionic axons innervate the vessels of the distal oesophagus.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s1975"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle1575">Abdominopelvic autonomic plexuses and ganglia</h3><div class="textfl" id="p2445">The abdominopelvic autonomic plexuses are somewhat variable and often fuse or are closely interrelated. The following descriptions encompass their main features (see <a href="../B9780702077050000598/B9780702077050000598.xhtml#f0020">Figs 59.3</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000598/B9780702077050000598.xhtml#f0025">59.4</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000732/B9780702077050000732.xhtml#f0020">73.8</a>).</div><section><a id="s1980"/><section><a id="s1985"/><h4 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1580">Coeliac plexus</h4><div class="textfl" id="p2450">The coeliac plexus is located at the level of the twelfth thoracic and first lumbar vertebrae. It is a dense network that unites the coeliac ganglia, and surrounds the coeliac trunk and the proximal superior mesenteric artery. It is posterior to the stomach and omental bursa and anterior to the crura of the respiratory diaphragm and the beginning of the abdominal aorta, and lies medial to the suprarenal glands. The plexus and ganglia receive the greater and lesser splanchnic nerves and branches from the vagal trunks. The plexus is in continuity with small branches along adjacent arteries and is connected to the phrenic, splenic, hepatic, superior mesenteric, suprarenal, renal and ovarian/testicular plexuses. Visceral afferent fibres in the coeliac plexus convey pain and other sensations from proximal abdominal viscera. Anaesthesia or ablation of these nerves (coeliac plexus blockade) is sometimes undertaken to treat medically intractable pain from pancreatic disorders.</div></section><section><a id="s1990"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1585">Coeliac and aorticorenal ganglia</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2455">The coeliac ganglia are irregular neural masses, measuring approximately 2<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm across, located between the origin of the coeliac trunk and superior mesenteric artery, medial to the suprarenal glands and anterior to the crura of the respiratory diaphragm (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib141" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_141">Zhang et al 2006</a>). They vary in number, size, shape and precise location; there are often two, one on each side. The right ganglion is frequently posterior to the inferior vena cava, and the left ganglion often lies posterior to the origin of the splenic artery. The ipsilateral greater splanchnic nerve joins the superior part of each ganglion and the lesser splanchnic nerve joins the inferior part. The most inferior part of each ganglion usually forms a distinct subdivision, the aorticorenal ganglion, which receives the ipsilateral lesser splanchnic nerve and gives origin to most of the renal plexus.</div></section><section><a id="s1995"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1590">Phrenic plexus</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2460">The phrenic plexus is a periarterial extension of the coeliac plexus around the right inferior phrenic artery, adjacent to the right crus of the respiratory diaphragm (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib103" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_103">Rusu 2006</a>). It contains one or two phrenic ganglia and a definable nerve trunk that connects the coeliac plexus and phrenic nerve: the phrenic ganglion is probably sympathetic (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib121" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_121">Tubbs et al 2008</a>). The phrenic plexus supplies branches to the suprarenal glands and the respiratory diaphragm.</div></section><section><a id="s2000"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1595">Superior mesenteric plexus and ganglion</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2465">The superior mesenteric plexus lies in the pre-aortic connective tissue posterior to the pancreas, around the origin of the superior mesenteric artery. It is an inferior continuation of the coeliac plexus and includes branches from the posterior vagal trunk and coeliac plexus. Its branches accompany the superior mesenteric artery and its branches. The superior mesenteric ganglion lies superiorly in the plexus, usually above the origin of the superior mesenteric artery.</div></section><section><a id="s2005"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1600">Intermesenteric plexus</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2470">Like other parts of the abdominal aortic autonomic plexus, the intermesenteric plexus is not a discrete structure but is part of a continuous periarterial nerve plexus connected to the ovarian/testicular, inferior mesenteric, iliac and superior hypogastric plexuses. It lies on the lateral and anterior aspects of the aorta, between the origins of the superior and inferior mesenteric arteries, and consists of numerous fine, interconnected nerve fibres and a few ganglia continuous superiorly with the superior mesenteric plexus and inferiorly with the superior hypogastric plexus. It is not well characterized but receives parasympathetic and sympathetic branches from the coeliac plexus and additional sympathetic contributions from the first and second lumbar splanchnic nerves.<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E54" id="pagebreak_1.464E54"/><a id="pg1464.e52"/></div></section><section><a id="s2010"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1605">Inferior mesenteric plexus</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2475">The inferior mesenteric plexus lies around the origin of the inferior mesenteric artery and is distributed along its branches. It is formed predominantly from the aortic plexus, supplemented by sympathetic fibres from the first and second lumbar splanchnic nerves and ascending pelvic parasympathetic fibres from the inferior hypogastric plexus (via the hypogastric nerves and superior hypogastric plexus). Disruption of the inferior mesenteric plexus alone rarely causes clinically significant disturbances of autonomic function.</div></section><section><a id="s2063"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1610">Superior hypogastric plexus</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2480">The superior hypogastric plexus lies anterior to the aortic bifurcation, the left common iliac vein, median sacral vessels, fifth lumbar vertebral body and sacral promontory, and between the common iliac arteries. It lies within extraperitoneal connective tissue in the midline, extending a little to the left. The breadth of the plexus and its constituent nerves varies; appearances range from a reticular-like arrangement to a band-like structure or one or two distinct nerve trunks (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib88" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_88">Paraskevas et al 2008</a>). The medial attachment of the sigmoid mesocolon and superior limit of the mesorectum lie anterior to the distal part of the plexus, separated from it by a thin layer of loose connective tissue. The plexus is formed by branches from three main sources: the abdominal aortic plexus (sympathetic and parasympathetic), lumbar splanchnic nerves (sympathetic) and pelvic splanchnic nerves (parasympathetic), which ascend from the inferior hypogastric plexus via the right and left hypogastric nerves (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib56" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_56">Kraima et al 2015</a>). Visceral sensory fibres also pass through the plexus. The hypogastric nerves lie in loose connective tissue just posterolateral to the proximal mesorectum and pass over the linea terminalis medial to the internal iliac vessels. The superior hypogastric plexus conveys branches to the inferior mesenteric plexus and to the ureteric, ovarian/testicular and common iliac nerve plexuses; additional small branches turn abruptly forwards into the proximal mesorectum to travel with the superior anorectal artery.</div></section><section><a id="s2020"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1615">Inferior hypogastric plexus</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2485">The inferior hypogastric plexus lies in the thin extraperitoneal connective tissue on the pelvic side wall anterolateral to the mesorectum. The internal iliac vessels and the attachments of levator ani and obturator internus lie laterally, and the superior vesical and occluded part of the umbilical arteries superiorly. In males, the inferior hypogastric plexus lies posterolaterally, on each side of the seminal glands, prostate and the fundus of the urinary bladder: the point where the ductus deferens crosses the ureter provides an approximate guide to the superior limit of the plexus (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib72" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_72">Mauroy et al 2003</a>). The proximal border of the plexus lies beneath the peritoneum of the rectovesical pouch and is in contact with the lateral aspect of the fundus of the urinary bladder. The anterior border reaches the posterior aspect of the prostate; at its inferior limit, the cavernous nerves of the penis pass forwards to reach the posterolateral aspect of the prostate (see <a href="../B9780702077050000732/B9780702077050000732.xhtml#f0020">Fig. 73.8</a>). In females, each plexus lies lateral to the cervix of the uterus, vaginal fornix and the fundus of the urinary bladder, often extending into the broad ligament of the uterus; the proximal limit of the plexus corresponds approximately to the level where the uterine artery crosses the ureter (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib5" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_5">Azaïs et al 2013</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p2490">The inferior hypogastric plexus is formed mainly from pelvic splanchnic (parasympathetic) and sacral splanchnic (sympathetic) branches; a smaller contribution is derived from sympathetic fibres (from the inferior lumbar ganglia) that descend into the plexus from the superior hypogastric plexus via the hypogastric nerves. It gives origin to a complex network of small pelvic branches that supply the pelvic viscera either directly or indirectly via periarterial plexuses. The branches of the inferior hypogastric plexus supply the ductus deferens, seminal glands, prostate, bulbo-urethral glands and penis in males; the ovary, uterine tubes, uterus, cervix of the uterus and vagina in females; and the urinary bladder and distal ureter in both sexes. The plexus plays a key role in continence and sexual function.</div></section><section><a id="s2064"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1620">Hypogastric nerves</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2495">The hypogastric nerves are usually paired nerve bundles but can consist instead of multiple filaments. They contain sympathetic fibres (mostly descending from the superior hypogastric plexus) and parasympathetic fibres (ascending from the inferior hypogastric plexus). The nerves run between the superior and inferior hypogastric plexuses on each side posterior to the presacral fascia, medial to the internal iliac vessels, and lateral to the anterior sacral foramina.</div></section><section><a id="s2030"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1625">Other autonomic plexuses and ganglia</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2500">Additional plexuses are described for abdominopelvic viscera, such as the hepatic and ovarian/testicular plexuses. Each plexus tends to lie around the main arterial supply to the named organ, receive both sympathetic and parasympathetic fibres from one or more of the major autonomic plexuses, and contain at least one ganglion. For example, autonomic ganglia supplying the testis are found around the origin of the testicular arteries from the abdominal aorta and have connections with the renal and intermesenteric plexuses and the first and second lumbar splanchnic nerves (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib77" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_77">Motoc et al 2010</a>).</div></section></section></section></section>


<section><a id="s2035"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle1630">Enteric Nervous System</h2><div class="textfl" id="p2505">The walls of the hollow viscera are densely innervated by both the enteric nervous system (intrinsic control) and the autonomic nervous system (extrinsic control). The latter is not essential for function, as evidenced by intestinal activity after transplantation of the extrinsically denervated part of the gastrointestinal tract. In contrast, neuropathies affecting the enteric nervous system, such as Hirschsprung’s disease, are potentially life-threatening. For a detailed description of the enteric nervous system, see <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib38" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_38">Furness et al (2014)</a>.</div><section><a id="s2040"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle1635">Intrinsic innervation</h3><div class="textfl" id="p2510">The intrinsic innervation of the gastrointestinal tract is derived from enteric neurones distributed throughout its wall in thousands of small ganglia, each consisting of neuronal cell bodies supported by enteric glial cells; it is estimated that there are between 200 and 600 million neurones in the human enteric nervous system. Enteric neurones are derived from neural crest cells and innervate the hollow viscera from oesophagus to anus, together with the pancreas and bile ducts.</div><div class="text" id="p2515">Most of the enteric neurones in the wall of the gastrointestinal tract are found in two ganglionated plexuses (see <a href="../B9780702077050000598/B9780702077050000598.xhtml#f0045">Fig. 59.9</a>). The most extensive of these is the myenteric (Auerbach’s) plexus, which consists of a network of nerve fibres and small ganglia lying between the circular and longitudinal layers of the muscularis externa. It runs in continuity from the oesophagus to the anus. The submucosal (Meissner’s) plexus has outer and inner components and is present throughout the intestines but is absent or minimal in the oesophagus and stomach (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib80" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_80">Nagy and Goldstein 2017</a>). Interconnecting, non-ganglionated nerve plexuses lie at various levels in the wall of the gastrointestinal tract, including the lamina propria (mucosal plexus); at the interface between the submucosa and muscularis externa; between the circular and longitudinal muscles (the non-ganglionated part of the myenteric plexus); and within the serosa.</div><div class="text" id="p2520">Individual enteric neurones function in one of several ways: as afferent (sensory) nerves responding to mechanical and chemical stimuli; as efferent (motor) nerves innervating epithelial cells (influencing absorption, secretion and/or the release of hormones), smooth muscle (excitatory or inhibitory), arterioles (vasoconstriction or vasodilatation) and lymphoid tissue; or as interneurones that relay and integrate signals. Collectively, they are involved in a hierarchy of enteric reflexes that include local reflexes within the wall of the hollow viscera; reflexes mediated through prevertebral ganglia; and reflexes mediated through the central nervous system (the gut–brain axis). The functions of enteric neurones can be further modulated by local environmental factors, e.g. enteric glia, gut microbiota and feeding state, and by general factors in the host, e.g. the immune system, stress and disease (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib16" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_16">Brierley and Linden 2014</a>). Pathological states become manifest by abnormal secretion, impaired absorption, disordered gastrointestinal motility and pain.</div></section></section>


<section><a id="s8345"/><section><a id="s0345"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle0285">Intracranial and intratemporal course</h3><div class="textfl" id="p0355">The facial nerve has intracranial (cisternal), intratemporal and extratemporal portions. The intratemporal portion is further divided into meatal, labyrinthine, tympanic (horizontal) and mastoid (vertical) segments (see <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E20" id="pagebreak_1.464E20"/><a id="pg1464.e18"/><a href="../B9780702077050000422/B9780702077050000422.xhtml#f0065">Fig. 42.12</a>). The cisternal portion emerges from the ventrolateral aspect of the caudal border of the pons. The meatal portion enters the porus acusticus of the internal acoustic meatus accompanied by the nervus intermedius, the vestibulocochlear nerve and the labyrinthine vessels. In this part of its course, the facial nerve lacks a fibrous sheath or endoneurium and is surrounded by a thin layer of arachnoid. The motor root, which supplies the muscles of the face, and the nervus intermedius, which contains sensory fibres concerned with the perception of taste and parasympathetic (secretomotor) fibres to various glands, are still separate components; they usually merge within the meatus. The labyrinthine segment runs from the fundus of the internal acoustic meatus to the geniculate ganglion, where the nerve makes the first bend or genu (see <a href="../B9780702077050000422/B9780702077050000422.xhtml#f0065">Fig. 42.12</a>). The labyrinthine segment is the shortest and narrowest part of the facial nerve; its lack of anastomosing arterial cascades renders it susceptible to vascular compression. The tympanic part initially curves around the oval window niche, then lies just anterior and inferior to the lateral semicircular canal and bends again at the second genu to become the vertical or mastoid part. The mastoid part is the longest of the petrous segments and runs from the pyramidal process to the stylomastoid foramen. The tympanic and mastoid segments of the facial nerve are supplied by the facial arch, formed by the petrosal branch of the middle meningeal artery and the stylomastoid branch of the posterior auricular artery.</div><div class="text" id="p0360">The branches that arise from the facial nerve within the temporal bone can be divided into those that come from the geniculate ganglion (greater petrosal nerve) and those that arise within the facial canal (nerve to stapedius and chorda tympani).</div><section><a id="s0350"/><section><a id="s0355"/><section><a id="s0360"/><section><a id="s0365"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0290">Greater petrosal nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p0365">The greater (superficial) petrosal nerve, a branch of the nervus intermedius, is the main branch from the geniculate ganglion. It passes anteriorly, receives a branch from the tympanic plexus and traverses a hiatus on the anterior surface of the petrous part of the temporal bone. It enters the middle cranial fossa, runs forwards in a groove on the bone above the lesser petrosal nerve, and then passes beneath the trigeminal ganglion to reach the foramen lacerum. Here it is joined by the deep petrosal nerve from the internal carotid sympathetic plexus, to become the nerve of the pterygoid canal (Vidian nerve). The greater petrosal nerve contains parasympathetic fibres destined for the pterygopalatine ganglion, and taste fibres from the palate. The geniculate ganglion also communicates with the lesser petrosal nerve.</div></section><section><a id="s0370"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0295">Nerve to stapedius</p><div class="textfl" id="p0370">The nerve to stapedius arises from the facial nerve in the facial nerve canal behind the pyramidal eminence of the posterior wall of the tympanic cavity and passes forwards through a small canal to reach the muscle.</div></section><section><a id="s0375"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0300">Chorda tympani</p><div class="textfl" id="p0375">The chorda tympani (see <a href="../B9780702077050000422/B9780702077050000422.xhtml#f0060">Figs 42.11</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000422/B9780702077050000422.xhtml#f0065">42.12</a>) leaves the facial nerve some 6<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm above the stylomastoid foramen and runs anterosuperiorly in a canal to enter the tympanic cavity via the posterior canaliculus. It then curves anteriorly in the substance of the tympanic membrane between its mucous and fibrous layers, and crosses medial to the upper part of the handle of the malleus to the anterior wall of the tympanic cavity, where it enters the anterior canaliculus. It exits the skull and enters the infratemporal fossa by passing through the medial end of the petrotympanic fissure posterior to the capsule of the temporomandibular joint. It next descends medial to the spine of the sphenoid bone, which it sometimes grooves, lying posterolateral to tensor veli palatini. It is crossed medially by the middle meningeal artery, the roots of the auriculotemporal nerve and the inferior alveolar nerve (see <a href="../B9780702077050000380/B9780702077050000380.xhtml#f0080">Fig. 38.23</a>) and joins the posterior aspect of the lingual nerve at an acute angle. The chorda tympani carries taste fibres from the anterior two-thirds of the tongue (but not the from the circumvallate papillae) and efferent preganglionic parasympathetic secretomotor fibres destined for the submandibular ganglion in the floor of the mouth.</div></section><section><a id="s0380"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0305">Dehiscences of the facial nerve canal</p><div class="textfl" id="p0380">The facial nerve may be somewhat variable in its anatomical course through the temporal bone (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib92" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_92">Proctor and Nager 1982</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib93" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_93">Proctor 1991</a>). It may split into two or three strands, starting at the geniculate ganglion, and then make its way across the promontory to the stylomastoid foramen, or pass a few millimetres posteriorly to its second genu, before it turns inferiorly posterior to the fossa incudis, a position where it is particularly vulnerable during surgical exploration of the mastoid antrum. The more proximal the division into strands, the more bizarre is the subsequent course. More distal bifurcations pass either side of the fenestra vestibuli. It may be dehiscent, particularly in its second part, when it occasionally overhangs the stapes, or run inferior to the stapedial superstructure, a position that renders it vulnerable during surgery to the stapes (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib6" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_6">Barnes et al 2001</a>). The motor fibres to the face may be carried through the chorda tympani, which is then enlarged. When this is the case, the distal facial nerve dwindles to a fibrous strand in a narrowed stylomastoid foramen. In chronic bone disease in the tympanic cavity, the facial nerve may be exposed in its canal. Inflammation may lead to facial paralysis of the infranuclear or lower motor neurone type.</div></section></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s0385"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle0310">Extratemporal course</h3><div class="textfl" id="p0385">The facial nerve emerges from the base of the skull at the stylomastoid foramen and almost immediately gives off the nerves to the posterior belly of digastric and stylohyoid and the posterior auricular nerve, which supplies the occipital belly of occipitofrontalis and some of the intrinsic auricular muscles (see <a href="../B9780702077050000367/B9780702077050000367.xhtml#f0085">Fig. 36.23</a>). The nerve next enters the parotid gland high up on its posteromedial surface and passes forwards and downwards behind the mandibular ramus. Within the substance of the gland, it branches into superior (temporofacial) and inferior (cervicofacial) trunks, usually just behind and superficial to the retromandibular vein. The trunks branch further to form a parotid plexus (pes anserinus). Five main terminal branches arise from the plexus, diverge within the gland and leave by its anteromedial surface, medial to its anterior margin, to supply the muscles of facial expression (see <a href="../B9780702077050000367/B9780702077050000367.xhtml#f0085">Fig. 36.23</a>). Six distinctive anastomotic patterns were originally classified by <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib26" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_26">Davis et al (1956)</a> and these are illustrated in <a href="../B9780702077050000367/B9780702077050000367.xhtml#f0090">Fig. 36.24</a>. Numerous microdissection studies have demonstrated considerable individual variation in branching patterns and anastomoses between branches, both within the parotid and on the face (e.g. <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib08" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_08">Lineaweaver et al 1997</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib07" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_07">Kwak et al 2004</a>): the account that follows is therefore an overview. In surgical terms, these anastomoses are important and presumably explain why accidental or deliberate division of a small branch often fails to result in the expected facial nerve weakness.</div><div class="text" id="p0390">The temporal branch usually divides into anterior and posterior rami soon after piercing the parotidomasseteric fascia below the zygomatic arch; there is often a middle (frontal) ramus. These rami cross the arch in subcutaneous tissue, lying in the subgaleal space: their course is extremely variable.</div><div class="text" id="p0395">Twigs supply intrinsic muscles on the lateral surface of the auricle and the anterior and superior auricular muscles. They communicate with the zygomaticotemporal branch of the maxillary nerve and the auriculotemporal branch of the mandibular nerve. The more anterior branches supply the frontal belly of occipitofrontalis, orbicularis oculi and corrugator and join the supraorbital and lacrimal branches of the ophthalmic nerve.</div><section><a id="s0390"/><section><a id="s0395"/><section><a id="s0400"/><section><a id="s0405"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0315">Zygomatic branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p0400">Zygomatic branches are generally multiple. They cross the zygomatic bone to the lateral canthus of the eye and supply orbicularis oculi and may also supply muscles innervated by the buccal branch. Twigs communicate with filaments of the lacrimal nerve and the zygomaticofacial branch of the maxillary nerve.</div></section><section><a id="s0410"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0320">Buccal nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p0405">The buccal branch of the facial nerve is usually single. It has a close relationship to the parotid duct for about 2.5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm after emerging from the parotid gland and typically lies below the duct. Superficial branches run beneath the subcutaneous fat and the superficial musculo-aponeurotic system (SMAS). Some branches pass deep to procerus and join the infratrochlear and external nasal nerves. Upper deep branches supply zygomaticus major and levator labii superioris and form an infraorbital plexus with the superior labial branches of the infraorbital nerve. They also supply levator anguli oris, zygomaticus minor, levator labii superioris alaeque nasi and the small nasal muscles (these branches are sometimes described as lower zygomatic branches). Lower deep branches supply buccinator and orbicularis oris and communicate with filaments of the buccal branch of the mandibular nerve.</div></section><section><a id="s0415"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0325">Marginal mandibular nerve</p><div class="textfl" id="p0410">There are usually two marginal mandibular nerves. They run forwards towards the angle of the mandible under platysma, and then turn upwards across the body of the mandible to pass under depressor anguli oris. The branches supply risorius and the muscles of the lower lip and chin. Filaments communicate with the mental nerve. The marginal mandibular branch has an important surgical relationship with the inferior border of the mandible.</div></section><section><a id="s0420"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0330">Cutaneous branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p0415">Cutaneous branches of the facial nerve accompany the auricular branch of the vagus and probably supply small areas on both aspects of the auricle, in the depression of the concha and over its eminence.<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E21" id="pagebreak_1.464E21"/><a id="pg1464.e19"/></div><div class="text" id="p0420">The facial nerve has intra- or extracranial connections with the cutaneous branches of all three divisions of the trigeminal nerve (including branches of the auriculotemporal, buccal, mental, lingual, infraorbital, zygomatic and ophthalmic nerves); with branches of the vestibulocochlear, glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves; and with branches of the cervical plexus (including the great auricular, greater and lesser occipital and transverse cervical nerves). These cutaneous connections are significant in facilitating the perineural spread of tumours that arise either within the parotid or on the face and explains why some patients with perineural spread from cutaneous or parotid malignancies may present with vocal cord palsy.</div></section><section><a id="s0425"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0335">Cervical branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p0425">The cervical branch of the facial nerve emerges from the lower part of the parotid gland and runs anteroinferiorly under platysma to the anterior neck. Typically single, it supplies platysma and communicates with the transverse cutaneous cervical nerve.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0430"/><h4 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0340">Lesions of the facial nerve</h4><div class="textfl" id="p0430">Facial paralysis may be due to an upper motor neurone lesion (when frontalis is partially spared because of the bilateral cortical representation of the muscles of the upper part of the face) or a lower motor neurone lesion (when all branches may be involved). Lower motor neurone facial paralysis is most commonly idiopathic (Bell’s palsy). There are a large number of other recognized causes that include geniculate herpes zoster (Ramsay Hunt syndrome), and malignant tumours of the parotid gland and temporal bone. Iatrogenic damage also accounts for a significant number of palsies, most often acquired in vestibular schwannoma, parotid and middle ear or mastoid surgery.</div></section><section><a id="s0435"/><section><a id="s0440"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0345">Bell’s palsy</p><div class="textfl" id="p0435">Bell’s palsy is an idiopathic lower motor neurone facial palsy. It may be complete or partial, and is characterized by a flaccid paralysis of the ipsilateral mimetic facial muscles (muscles of facial expression); decreased lacrimation in the ipsilateral eye (which is controlled by neurones in the greater petrosal nerve); and hyperacusis or decreased tolerance of loud noises in the ipsilateral ear as a result of paralysis of stapedius. Its cause remains the subject of speculation but is most probably a herpes virus infection (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib140" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_140">Zandian et al 2014</a>). Magnetic resonance imaging studies suggest that there are inflammatory changes in the labyrinthine and perigeniculate segments of the facial nerve. In the vast majority of cases, spontaneous full recovery takes place after a few weeks.</div></section></section></section></section></section></section>


<section><a id="s8700"/><section><a id="s0700"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle0540">Extracranial course</h3><div class="textfl" id="p0810">As the accessory nerve exits the jugular foramen, it runs posterolaterally and passes either medial or lateral to the internal jugular vein; occasionally, it may pass through the vein. The extradural part of the nerve then crosses the transverse process of the atlas and is crossed by the occipital artery before descending obliquely, medial to the styloid process, stylohyoid and the posterior belly of digastric. Running with the superior sternocleidomastoid branch of the occipital artery, it reaches the upper part of sternocleidomastoid and enters its deep surface, to form an anastomosis with fibres from C2 alone, C3 alone, or C2 and C3 (the ansa of Maubrac). It may also communicate with the ventral root of the first cervical nerve (McKenzie branch).</div><div class="text" id="p0815">The accessory nerve occasionally terminates in sternocleidomastoid. More commonly it emerges, usually as one trunk, 5–10<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm cephalad to the point where the great auricular nerve winds around sternocleidomastoid, and moves from a plane posterior to the muscle to one that is anterior. The relationship between the accessory nerve and the great auricular nerve in the posterior triangle is the key to exposure of the accessory nerve: the general relations of the posterior triangle vary with individual physique, but this relation between the two nerves is reliably consistent. The accessory nerve then runs across the fatty areolar tissue at the apex of the posterior triangle, in close relation to the superior superficial cervical lymph nodes in levels Va and Vb, deep to platysma. It is separated from the underlying levator scapulae by this areolar tissue, and, more deeply, by the prevertebral fascia (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0040">Fig. 35.7A</a>). One slender branch passes to the upper fibres of trapezius either deep to sternocleidomastoid or just beyond it. The nerve pierces the fascia covering the deep surface of trapezius close to the anterior border of the muscle and then runs caudally about 2<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm from that border. It passes down in a characteristic sinuous fashion, accompanied by slender vessels to the deep, inner face of trapezius. A branch from the cervical plexus (third and fourth cervical ventral rami) joins the nerve just above the clavicle. Intraoperative stimulation of this branch rarely evokes a muscular response; it probably conveys afferent fibres from the middle and lower parts of trapezius. The nerve now turns medially, continuing in parallel to the spine of the scapula about 4<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm above it. At the medial end of the spine, the nerve turns caudally again, passing down parallel to the medial border of the scapula. It divides into terminal muscular branches about 7<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm distal to the scapular spine. Although sternocleidomastoid, and the middle and the lower portions of trapezius, may be partially supplied by branches from the cervical plexus, the upper part of trapezius is innervated solely by the accessory nerve.</div><div class="text" id="p0820">The cervical course of the accessory nerve follows a line from the lower anterior part of the tragus to the tip of the transverse process of the atlas, and then across sternocleidomastoid and the posterior triangle to a point on the anterior border of trapezius 3–5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm above the clavicle.</div><div class="text" id="p0825">The accessory nerve is thought to provide the sole motor supply to sternocleidomastoid; the second and third cervical nerves are believed to carry proprioceptive fibres from it. The supranuclear pathway of fibres destined for sternocleidomastoid is not simple; current evidence favours bilateral hemispheric innervation, although opinion varies as to the extent of the ipsilateral input. The motor supply to the descending (upper) and transverse (middle) portions of trapezius is primarily from the accessory nerve under predominantly contralateral supranuclear control. Usually, trapezius receives an innervation from the cervical plexus, in most cases from C3 and C4 (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib123" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_123">Tubbs et al 2011</a>). A study using intraoperative electroneurography and histochemical analyses found that, when present, the cervical fibres did not consistently innervate all three parts of the muscle (descending, transverse and ascending), and that fibres from C2 usually travelled via the accessory nerve, while fibres from C3 and C4 innervated trapezius independently (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib94" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_94">Pu et al 2008</a>). In addition, to their motor contribution, C3 and C4 also carry proprioceptive fibres from trapezius.</div><div class="text" id="p0830">On the basis of the incomplete denervation of the muscle that sometimes happens following sacrifice of both the accessory nerve and the cervical plexus, it has been suggested that trapezius receives a partial motor supply from other sources, possibly via thoracic roots. (For a detailed review of the applied surgical anatomy of the accessory nerve plexus, see <a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib17" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_17">Brown (2002)</a>.)</div><div class="text" id="p0835">Sensory ganglia have been described along the course of the intradural portion of the nerve.</div><section><a id="s7705"/><section><a id="s0705"/><section><a id="s0710"/><h4 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0545">Lesions of the accessory nerve</h4><div class="textfl" id="p0840">Lesions of the accessory nerve may be sustained centrally, at its exit from the skull or in the neck. The supranuclear fibres that influence motor neurones innervating sternocleidomastoid decussate twice; a lesion of the corticospinal system above the pons therefore produces weakness of the ipsilateral sternocleidomastoid and contralateral trapezius. Episodic contraction of sternocleidomastoid and trapezius, often accompanied by contraction of other muscle groups, e.g. splenius capitis, occurs in spasmodic torticollis, a focal dystonia. In jugular foramen syndrome, caused by pathologies including nasopharyngeal carcinoma or a jugular paraganglioma, lesions of the glossopharyngeal, vagus and accessory nerves coexist. The accessory nerve can be injured more distally in the neck by trauma or by surgical exploration in the posterior triangle, particularly at the apex of the triangle. Typically, there is immediate pain, then dropping of the shoulder and a remarkable loss of function. The average ISHA is about 50°. The pain is characteristic: often severe, deep-seated, dull, constant and boring in nature, and felt around the scapula and the posterior aspect of the neck and shoulder. The posture of the scapula is also characteristic: because of the loss of the great suspensory muscle, trapezius, the scapula drops down and away from the spinal column (see <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0215">Fig. 49.37</a>). There is often winging of the scapula, easily distinguished from that caused by paralysis of serratus anterior by the posture of the scapula (see <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0220">Fig. 49.38</a>). The nerve appears to be relatively immune to the harmful effects of delayed repair, even as late as 4 years after injury, with early relief of pain long before there is reinnervation of muscle (<a href="../B978070207705000080X/B978070207705000080X_bib.xhtml#bib19" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_19">Camp and Birch 2011</a>).<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E28" id="pagebreak_1.464E28"/><a id="pg1464.e26"/></div></section></section></section></section></section>


</body></html>