<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en" xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
   <meta charset="utf-8" />
   <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1, shrink-to-fit=no" />
   <title>e-pub-Transcription-factors</title>
   <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/style.css" />
   <script type="text/javascript" src="../script/jquery-3.6.0.min.js"></script>
   <script type="text/javascript" src="../script/glossary-poptip.js"></script>
   <script type="text/javascript" src="../script/transcription.js"></script>
</head>
<body class="transcription">
   <div class="content-container">
      <div class="document-area11" role="main">
         <h1>Transcription Factors</h1>
         <h2>DNA-binding transcription factors recognize specific DNA sequences</h2>
         <div class="page-content">
            <p>
               The preceding discussion has emphasized the structure of the gene and the <i>cis</i>-acting elements that
               regulate gene expression. We now turn to the proteins that interact with these DNA elements and thus
               regulate gene transcription. Because the basal transcriptional machinery—Pol II and the general
               transcription factors—is incapable of efficient gene transcription alone, additional proteins are
               required to stimulate the activity of the enzyme complex. The additional proteins include transcription
               factors that recognize and bind to specific DNA sequences (enhancers) located near their target genes, as
               well as others (see
               <span class="dropdown def-img" tabindex="0" role="button" aria-label="tooltip" data-dfn="l1"></span>
               <a href="#page-tab83" aria-label="Coactivators and corepressors" class="link-inline">pp. 83–84</a>) that
               do not bind to DNA.
            </p>

            <p>Examples of <b>DNA-binding transcription factors</b> are shown in <a href="#table-tab"
                  class="link-inline">Table 4-1</a>. The general mechanism of action of a specific transcription factor
               is depicted in <a href="#" class="link-inline">Figure 4-6<i style="color: rgb(0, 107, 178);">B</i></a>.
               After the basal transcriptional machinery assembles on the gene promoter, it can interact with a
               transcription factor that binds to a specific DNA element, the enhancer (or silencer). Looping out of the
               intervening DNA permits physical interaction between the activator (or repressor) and the basal
               transcriptional machinery, which subsequently leads to stimulation (or inhibition) of gene transcription.
               The specificity with which transcription factors bind to DNA depends on the interactions between the
               amino-acid side chains of the transcription factor and the purine and pyrimidine bases in DNA. Most of
               these interactions consist of noncovalent hydrogen bonds between amino acids and DNA bases. A peptide
               capable of a specific pattern of hydrogen bonding can recognize and bind to the reciprocal pattern in the
               major (and to a lesser extent the minor) groove of DNA. Interaction with the DNA backbone may also occur
               and involves electrostatic interactions (salt bridge formation) with anionic phosphate groups. The site
               that a transcription factor recognizes
               (see <a href="#table-tab" class="link-inline">Table 4-1</a>
               ) is generally short, usually less than a dozen or so base pairs.
            </p>

            <div class="table-title">
               <span class="table-designation">TABLE</span>
               <span class="table-enumeration">4-1</span>
               <span class="table-caption">DNA-Binding Transcription Factors and the DNA Sequences They Recognize</span>

               <div class="">

                  <table class="table-4-1" id="table-tab">
                     <thead>

                        <tr>
						
						   <th>NAME</th>

                           <th>TYPE</th>

                           <th>RECOGNITION SITE


                              <div class="star dropdown def-img star-tooltip" aria-label="star" tabindex="0"
                                 role="button" data-dfn="l2" />
                           </th>

                           <th>BINDS AS</th>
                        </tr>
                     </thead>

                     <tbody>

                        <tr>

                           <td>Sp1</td>

                           <td>Zinc finger</td>

                           <td>5′-GGGCGG-3′</td>

                           <td>Monomer</td>
                        </tr>

                        <tr>

                           <td>AP-1</td>

                           <td>bZIP</td>

                           <td>5′-TGASTCA-3′</td>

                           <td>Dimer</td>
                        </tr>

                        <tr>

                           <td>C/EBP</td>

                           <td>bZIP</td>

                           <td>5′-ATTGCGCAAT-3′</td>

                           <td>Dimer</td>
                        </tr>

                        <tr>

                           <td>Heat shock factor</td>

                           <td>bZIP</td>

                           <td>5′-NGAAN-3′</td>

                           <td>Trimer</td>
                        </tr>

                        <tr>

                           <td>ATF/CREB</td>

                           <td>bZIP</td>

                           <td>5′-TGACGTCA-3′</td>

                           <td>Dimer</td>
                        </tr>

                        <tr>

                           <td>c-Myc</td>

                           <td>bHLH</td>

                           <td>5′-CACGTG-3′</td>

                           <td>Dimer</td>
                        </tr>

                        <tr>

                           <td>Oct-1</td>

                           <td>HTH</td>

                           <td>5′-ATGCAAAT-3′</td>

                           <td>Monomer</td>
                        </tr>

                        <tr>

                           <td>NF-1</td>

                           <td>Novel</td>

                           <td>5′-TTGGCN<sub>5</sub>GCCAA-3′</td>

                           <td>Dimer</td>
                        </tr>
                     </tbody>
                     <tfoot>

                        <tr>

                           <td colspan="4">
                              ATF, activating transcription factor; NF-1, nuclear factor 1.
                           </td>
                        </tr>
                     </tfoot>
                  </table>
               </div>
            </div>

            <p>DNA-binding transcription factors do not recognize single, unique DNA sequences; rather, they recognize a
               <i>family</i> of closely related sequences. For example, the transcription factor AP-1 (activator protein
               1) recognizes the sequences
            </p>

            <ul>

               <li>
                  5′-<span class="tga" aria-label="T G A">TGA</span> C <span aria-label="T C" class="tga">TC</span>A-3′
               </li>

               <li>
                  5′-<span class="tga" aria-label="T G A">TGA</span> C <span aria-label="T C" class="tga">TC</span>A-3′
               </li>

               <li>
                  5′-<span class="tga" aria-label="T G A">TGA</span> C <span aria-label="T C" class="tga">TC</span>A-3′
               </li>
            </ul>

            <p>and so on, as well as each of the complementary sequences. That is, some <i>redundancy</i> is usually
               built into the recognition sequence for a transcription factor. An important consequence of these
               properties is that the recognition site for a transcription factor may occur many times in the genome.
               For example, if a transcription factor recognizes a 6-bp sequence, the sequence would be expected to
               occur once every 4<sup>6</sup> (or <span aria-label="4,0,9,6,7)"> 4096)</span> base pairs, that is, <span
                  aria-label="seven multiply by 10 power of 5 for 7 × 105 ">7 × 10<sup>5</sup></span> times in the human
               genome. If redundancy is permitted, recognition sites will occur even more frequently. Of course, most of
               these sites will not be relevant to gene regulation but will instead have occurred simply by chance. This
               high frequency of recognition sites leads to an important concept: <i>transcription factors act in
                  combination.</i> Thus, high-level expression of a gene requires that a combination of multiple
               transcription factors bind to multiple regulatory elements. Although it is complicated, this system
               ensures that transcription activation occurs only at appropriate locations. Moreover, this system permits
               greater fine-tuning of the system, inasmuch as the activity of individual transcription factors can be
               altered to modulate the overall level of transcription of a gene.</p>
			   
			   <p>An important general feature of DNA-binding transcription factors is their <b>modular</b> construction (<a href="#" class="link-inline">Fig. 4-8<i>A</i></a>). Transcription factors may be divided into discrete domains that bind DNA (DNA-binding domains) and domains that activate transcription (transactivation domains). <span class="dropdown def-img text-highlighter" tabindex="0" role="button" aria-label="tooltip" title="n4-6"  data-dfn="l3">Grouping of Transcription Factors According to Transactivation Domain </span> This property was first directly demonstrated for a yeast transcription factor known as GAL4, which activates certain genes when yeast grows in galactose-containing media. GAL4 has two domains. One is a so-called zinc finger (see <dfn title="ch04-82a"> </dfn><a href="#" class="link-inline">p. 82</a>) that mediates sequence-specific binding to DNA. The other domain is enriched in acidic amino acids (i.e., glutamate and aspartate) and is necessary for transcriptional activation. This “acidic blob” domain of GAL4 can be removed and replaced with the transactivation domain from a different transcription factor VP16 (see <a href="#" class="link-inline">Fig. 4-8<i>B</i></a>). The resulting GAL4-VP16 chimera binds to the same DNA sequence as normal GAL4 but mediates transcriptional activation via the VP16 transactivation domain. This type of “domain-swapping” experiment indicates that transcription factors have a modular construction in which physically distinct domains mediate binding to DNA and transcriptional activation (or repression).</p>

            <h3>Basic Zipper</h3>

            <p>Also known as the leucine zipper family, the basic zipper (bZIP) family consists of transcription factors
               that bind to DNA as dimers (see
               <a href="#" class="link-inline">Fig. 4-9<i style="color: rgb(0, 107, 178);">B</i></a>). Members include
               C/EBP<span class="text-serif">β</span> (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-<span
                  class="text-serif">β</span>), c-Fos, c-Jun, and CREB. Each monomer consist of two domains, a basic
               region that contacts DNA and a leucine zipper region that mediates dimerization. The basic region
               contains about 30 amino acids and is enriched in arginine and lysine residues. This region is responsible
               for sequence-specific binding to DNA via an <span class="text-serif">α</span> helix that inserts into the
               major groove of DNA. The leucine zipper consists of a region of about 30 amino acids in which every
               seventh residue is a leucine. Because of this spacing, the leucine residues align on a common face every
               second turn of an <span class="text-serif">α</span> helix. Two protein subunits that both contain leucine
               zippers can associate because of hydrophobic interactions between the leucine side chains; they form a
               tertiary structure called a <i>coiled coil.</i> Proteins of this family interact with DNA as
               <i>homo</i>dimers or as structurally related <i>hetero</i>dimers. Dimerization is essential for
               transcriptional activity because mutations of the leucine residues abolish both dimer formation and the
               ability to bind DNA and activate transcription. The crystal structure reveals that these transcription
               factors resemble scissors in which the blades represent the leucine zipper domains and the handles
               represent the DNA-binding domains (see <a href="#" class="link-inline">Fig. 4-9<i
                     style="color: rgb(0, 107, 178);">B</i></a>).
            </p>

         </div>
      </div>
      <aside class="overlay">
         <div class="page-numbers">
            <div class="page-number" style="top: 229.338px;">p. 81</div>
            <div class="page-number" style="top: 1910.89px;" id="page-tab83">p. 83</div>
         </div>

         <div class="discussion-icons" />

         <div class="hover-overlays" />

         <div class="closed-caption-buttons" />

         <div class="captionator-captions" />
      </aside>

      <div id="ariaMessages" class="visually-hidden" aria-live="assertive" />
   </div>

</body>
</html>

