<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html lang="EN" xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head><meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/><title>Gray's Anatomy</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../Style/Elsevier_eBook.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" media="only screen" href="../../Style/media.css"/></head><body><section role="doc-chapter" epub:type="chapter"><a id="lst00001"/><div id="CN"/><h1 class="fmtitle" epub:type="title" id="B9780702077050310011">Eponyms</h1><div class="para_fl" id="p0010">An annotated list of eponyms, edited by Harold Ellis, was first published in the 39th edition. That list has now been updated by Susan Standring. An appropriate reference has been cited when it has not proved possible to source biographical information.</div><div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0010"><span class="bold">Achilles tendon</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0015">   the calcaneal tendon.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0020">   <span class="italic">Achilles, in Greek mythology, was slain by a wound in his vulnerable heel, inflicted by Paris in the Trojan War.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0015"><span class="bold">Adam’s apple</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0025">   a protrusion in the front of the throat that is part of the larynx.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0030">   <span class="italic">According to the Old Testament, Adam was the first man.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0020"><span class="bold">Adamkiewicz, artery of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0035">   the largest anterior medullary feeder artery to the anterior spinal artery. It varies in level, arising from the lower (T9–11) posterior intercostal, the subcostal or, less frequently, the upper, lumbar (L1–2) arteries. Most often occurs on the left side.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0040">   <span class="italic">Albert Adamkiewicz (1850–1921), Professor of Pathology, University of Cracow, Poland.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0025"><span class="bold">Addison’s disease</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0045">   a disease resulting from progressive destruction of the suprarenal gland with deficiency in the secretion of adrenocortical hormones.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0050">   <span class="italic">Thomas Addison (1795–1860), English physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0030"><span class="bold">Alcock’s canal</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0055">   canalis pudendalis.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0060">   <span class="italic">Benjamin Alcock (1801–1833), British anatomist who published an article in 1836 on the iliac arteries.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0035"><span class="bold">Allen’s test</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0065">   a test of sufficiency of the blood supply to the hand by compression and release of the ulnar and radial arteries, and observation of the colour change of the hand.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0070">   <span class="italic">EV Allen (1901–1961), Professor of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0040"><span class="bold">Alport’s syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0075">   a rare hereditary condition characterized by progressive renal failure.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0080">   <span class="italic">Arthur Cecil Alport (1880–1959), South African physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0045"><span class="bold">Alzheimer’s disease</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0085">   the most common form of dementia, characterized at postmortem by neurofibrillary tangles and amyloid plaques.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0090">   <span class="italic">Alois Alzheimer (1864–1915), neurologist, Breslau, Poland.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0050"><span class="bold">Ammon’s horn</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0095">   the hippocampus. Cornu Ammonis, or Ammon’s horn, describes the whorled, chambered shells of a fossil genus of Cephalopods. It also refers to the ram-shaped horns on the head of the Egyptian god Amun.</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0055"><span class="bold">Andresen lines</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0100">   structural lines within dentine, representing incremental lines that run more or less perpendicular to the direction of the tubules. They represent an incremental period of about 1week and are best visualized when longitudinal ground sections are viewed between crossed polars.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0105">   <span class="italic">Viggo Andresen (1870–1950), Norwegian orthodontist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0060"><span class="bold">Angelman syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0110">   a chromosome 15 disorder comprising microcephaly with mental and motor retardation, epilepsy, ataxic gait or complete inability to walk, muscle hypotonia, EEG abnormalities and peculiar facies marked by a protruding jaw and tongue, occipital depression and blue eyes.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0115">   <span class="italic">Harry Angelman (1915–1996), English paediatrician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0065"><span class="bold">Apert’s syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0120">   a complex of craniofacial abnormalities caused by premature craniosynostosis, usually of the coronal suture, leading to turribrachycephaly, associated with syndactyly and polydactyly.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0125">   <span class="italic">Eugène Charles Apert (1868–1940), French paediatrician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0070"><span class="bold">Arantius, nodule of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0130">   a small nodule in the free border of the aortic valves.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0135">   <span class="italic">Julio Caesar Aranzio (Arantius) (1530–1589), pupil of Vesalius. Professor of Medicine and Surgery, Bologna, Italy.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0075"><span class="bold">Argyll Robertson pupil</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0140">   a pupil that reacts to accommodation but not light. A highly specific sign in neurosyphilis but may also occur in other conditions such as sarcoidosis, multiple sclerosis, and, occasionally, diabetes mellitus.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0145">   <span class="italic">Douglas Moray Cooper Lamb Argyll Robertson (1837–1909), ophthalmic surgeon, Edinburgh, UK. Worked in Berlin, Germany, with the German ophthalmologist Albrecht von Graefe.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0080">Arnold: Arnold’s bundle</span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0150">   frontopontine fibres;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0085"><span class="bold">innominate canal of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0155">   the canal in the petrous portion of the temporal bone that transmits the auricular branch of the vagus;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0090"><span class="bold">Arnold’s nerve</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0160">   the auricular branch of the vagus.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0165">   <span class="italic">Friedrich Arnold (1803–1890), German anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0095"><span class="bold">Arnold–Chiari malformation</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0170">   a congenital brainstem and cerebellar herniation through the foramen magnum.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0175">   <span class="italic">Julius Arnold (1835–1915), Professor of Pathology, Heidelberg, Germany; Hans Chiari (1851–1916), Austrian pathologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0100"><span class="bold">Auerbach’s plexus</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0180">   the autonomic nervous plexus between the circular and longitudinal layers of muscle of the intestinal wall.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0185">   <span class="italic">Leopold Auerbach (1828–1897), Professor of Neuropathology, Breslau, Poland.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0105"><span class="bold">Axenfeld–Rieger syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0190">   an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by bilateral abnormalities of the anterior segment of the eye in association with extraocular anomalies.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0195">   <span class="italic">Karl Theodor Paul Polykarpus Axenfeld (1867–1930), German ophthalmologist; Herwigh Rieger (1898–1986), Austrian ophthalmologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0110"><span class="bold">Babinski reflex, response, sign</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0200">   an upgoing plantar response in pyramidal tract disturbances.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0205">   <span class="italic">Joseph Babinski (1857–1922), pupil of Charcot, neurologist, Hôpital Pitié, Paris, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0115"><span class="bold">Bachmann’s bundle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0210">   the intra-auricular bundle.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0215">   <span class="italic">Jean George Bachmann (1877–1959), German–American physiologist, Professor of Physiology, Atlanta College of Physicians and Surgeons 1910–1915, USA.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0120"><span class="bold">Baillarger, bands, lines, striae, stripe of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0220">   inner and outer white striations on the cerebral cortex.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0225">   <span class="italic">Jules Gabriel Baillarger (1815–1890), French neurologist and psychiatrist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0125"><span class="bold">Bardet–Biedl syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0230">   an autosomal recessive ciliopathy characterized by retinal dystrophy, obesity, postaxial polydactyly, renal dysfunction, learning difficulties and hypogonadism.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0235">   <span class="italic">Georges Louis Bardet (1885–1966), French physician;</span></div><div class="para_indented" id="p0240">   <span class="italic">Artur Biedl (1869–1933), Hungarian pathologist and endocrinologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0130"><span class="bold">Barkow, ligament of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0245">   the anterior and posterior portions of the fibrous capsule of the elbow joint.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0250">   <span class="italic">Hans KL Barkow (1798–1873), German anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0135"><span class="bold">Barr body</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0255">   the inactive X-chromatin mass in the nucleus of female cells.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0260">   <span class="italic">Murray Llewellyn Barr (1908–1995), Professor of Anatomy, University of Western Ontario, Canada.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0140"><span class="bold">Barrett’s oesophagus</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0265">   abnormal columnar mucosa (Barrett’s mucosa) that covers a variable length of the distal oesophagus.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0270">   <span class="italic">Norman Rupert Barrett (1903–1979), consultant thoracic surgeon, Royal Brompton Hospital, London, UK.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0145"><span class="bold">Bartholin’s: ducts and gland</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0275">   the sublingual salivary gland and its ducts;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0150"><span class="bold">glands</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0280">   the greater vestibular glands on either side of the vaginal orifice.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0285">   <span class="italic">Casper Bartholin (1655–1738), Professor of Medicine, Anatomy and Physics, Copenhagen, Denmark.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0155"><span class="bold">Bartons’ adductor cord</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0290">   a dense cord on the ulnar side of the little finger that runs from the medial edge of the insertion of abductor digiti minimi (Barton NJ 1984 Dupuytren’s disease arising from the abductor digiti minimi. J Hand Surg (Brit &amp; Europ) 9:265–70).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0160"><span class="bold">Bassett’s ligament</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0295">   an accessory anterior–inferior tibiofibular ligament that presents as a low-lying slip inserted so far distally on the fibula that it may cause irritation of the lateral aspect of the talus.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0300">   <span class="italic">Frank H. Bassett III (1928–2007), American orthopaedic surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0165"><span class="bold">Batson’s vertebral venous plexus</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0305">   the valveless vertebral venous veins that communicate with the prostatic venous plexus and explain the readiness of carcinoma of the prostate to spread to the pelvic bones and vertebrae.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0310">   <span class="italic">Oscar Batson (1894–1979), Professor of Anatomy, University of Philadelphia, USA.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0170"><span class="bold">Battle’s sign</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0315">   bruising over the mastoid process developing 2 or 3days after fracture of the posterior cranial fossa.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0320">   <span class="italic">William Battle (1855–1936), surgeon, St Thomas Hospital, London, UK.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0175"><span class="bold">Baxter’s nerve</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0325">   the first branch of the lateral plantar nerve (Baxter DE, Thigpen CM 1989 Heel pain: operative results. Foot Ankle 5:16–25).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0330">   <span class="italic">Donald E Baxter, American orthopaedic surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0180"><span class="bold">Beahrs’ triangle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0335">   otherwise known as Riddle’s triangle, the triangle is delimited by the recurrent laryngeal nerve in the tracheo-oesophageal groove, the inferior thyroid artery and the common carotid artery.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0340">   <span class="italic">Oliver Howard Beahrs (1914–2006), American surgeon.</span><span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E148" id="pagebreak_1.464E148"/><a id="pg1464e.146"/></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0185"><span class="bold">Bechterew, nucleus of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0345">   the nucleus centralis tegmenti superior.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0350">   <span class="italic">Vladimir M Bekhterev (Bechterew) (1857–1927), Russian neurologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0190"><span class="bold">Becker muscular dystrophy</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0355">   muscular dystrophy of the pelvis girdle type.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0360">   <span class="italic">Peter Emil Becker (1908–2000), German human geneticist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0195"><span class="bold">Beck’s triad</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0365">   a combination of three symptoms that characterize cardiac tamponade: high central venous pressure, low arterial pressure and a small, quiet heart.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0370">   <span class="italic">Claude Schaeffer Beck (1894–1971), American surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0200"><span class="bold">Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0375">   an overgrowth syndrome – main symptoms are gigantism, macroglossia and umbilical abnormalities in the newborn, enlarged liver and spleen, hyperplasia of the kidney, congenital abnormalities of the urinary tract, slight microcephaly, clonic seizures.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0380">   <span class="italic">John Bruce Beckwith (1933–), American paediatric pathologist; Hans-Rudolf Wiedemann (1915–2006), German paediatrician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0205"><span class="bold">Beighton Scoring System</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0385">   a system that measures joint hypermobility on a 9-point scale.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0390">   <span class="italic">Peter H Beighton (1934–), British medical geneticist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0210"><span class="bold">Bell’s muscle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0395">   a band of muscular fibres forming a slight fold in the wall of the bladder, running from the uvula vesicae to the opening of the ureter on either side, and bounding the trigonum (Fuss FK 1992 Contribution to the trigone musculature in the case of ureteral duplication. J Urol 147:1363–4).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0215"><span class="bold">Bell’s: nerve</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0400">   the long thoracic nerve;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0220"><span class="bold">palsy</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0405">   paresis or paralysis, usually unilateral, of the facial muscles, caused by dysfunction of the facial nerve.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0410">   <span class="italic">Sir Charles Bell (1774–1842), surgeon, Middlesex Hospital, London, UK.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0225"><span class="bold">Bennett shift, movement</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0415">   the lateral shift of the working mandibular condyle during a laterotrusive movement.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0420">   <span class="italic">Norman Bennett (1870–1947), British dentist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0230"><span class="bold">Bergmann cells, glia</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0425">   the glial cells of the cerebellum.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0430">   <span class="italic">Gottlieb Heinrich Bergmann (1781–1861), neurologist and anatomist, Medical Director, Hildersheim Asylum, Germany.</span></div><div class="para_indented" id="p0435">   <span class="italic">Bernard–Horner syndrome:</span></div><div class="para_indented" id="p0440">   <span class="italic">see</span> <span class="bold"><span class="italic">Horner’s syndrome</span></span>.</div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0235"><span class="bold">Bernoulli effect</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0445">   the phenomenon in which fluid flowing through a tube of varying diameter travels fastest and exerts the largest lateral pressure at its narrowest point.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0450">   <span class="italic">Jakob Bernoulli (1654–1705), mathematician, Switzerland. Shares with Isaac Newton the invention of calculus.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0240"><span class="bold">Berrettini branch</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0455">   a superficial connection between the median and ulnar nerves, apparently displayed in an anatomical plate by Pietro Berrettini di Cortona in 1741. Similar communications are said to be shown in a print from Charles Estienne dated 1545 (Berrettini P, Petrioli CR 1741 Tabulae Anatomicae. Rome: Typographia Antonii de Rubeis: 1–4).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0245"><span class="bold">Berry’s ligament</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0460">   the thickened elastic bundle connecting the superior horn of the thyroid cartilage to the tip of the greater horn of the hyoid cartilage (synonyms: lateral thyrohyoid ligament; ligamentum thyrohyoideum laterale).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0465">   <span class="italic">Sir James Berry (1860–1946), Canadian surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0250"><span class="bold">Betz cells</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0470">   large pyramidal cells of the cerebral cortex.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0475">   <span class="italic">Vladimir Aleksandrovich Betz (1834–1894), Professor of Anatomy, Kiev, Ukraine.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0255"><span class="bold">Bezold’s abscess</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0480">   subperiosteal temporal bone abscess.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0485">   <span class="italic">Friedrich Bezold (1842–1908), otologist, Munich, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0260"><span class="bold">Bichat, buccal fat pad of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0490">   a variable, but usually considerable, amount of adipose tissue in the cheek. It is often encapsulated to form a biconcave mass, that is particularly evident in infants (the suctorial fat pad).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0495">   <span class="italic">Marie-François Xavier Bichat (1771–1802), Professor of Anatomy and physician, Hôtel Dieu, Paris, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0265"><span class="bold">Bielschowsky stain</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0500">   a silver stain for nerve fibres.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0505">   <span class="italic">Max Bielschowsky (1869–1940), German neuropathologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0270"><span class="bold">Billroth, cords of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0510">   splenic cords found in the red pulp between the sinusoids.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0515">   <span class="italic">Christian Albert Theodor Billroth (1829–1894), German-Austrian surgeon, considered to be the founder of modern abdominal surgery.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0275"><span class="bold">Bill’s bar</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0520">   a vertical crest that separates the superior fundus above the crista falciformis into anterior and posterior portions containing the facial nerve (and nervus intermedius) and the superior vestibular nerve, respectively. It is usually described as a thin layer of arachnoid tissue that may have an osseous medial component.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0525">   <span class="italic">William Fouts House (1923–2012), American otologist, physician and medical researcher. Developed and invented the cochlear implant.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0280"><span class="bold">Birbeck granules</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0530">   small, cross-striated granules first reported in the Langerhans cells of the epidermis.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0535">   <span class="italic">Michael S Birbeck (1925–2005), cancer researcher, Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0285"><span class="bold">Bland–White–Garland syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0540">   an anomalous origin of the left coronary artery arising from the pulmonary artery (ALCAPA) – a rare, but serious, congenital anomaly. The first clinical description in conjunction with autopsy findings was given by Bland and colleagues in 1933 (Bland EF 1933 Congenital anomalies of the coronary arteries: report of an unusual case associated with cardiac hypertrophy. Am Heart J 8:787–801).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0290"><span class="bold">Blake’s pouch</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0545">   a temporary outpouching of the posterior membranous area continuous with the fourth ventricle; its neck becomes the foramen of Magendie (Blake JA 1900 The roof and lateral recesses of the fourth ventricle, considered morphologically and embryologically. J Comp Neurol 10:79–108).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0550">   <span class="italic">Joseph A Blake (1864–1937), American physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0295"><span class="bold">Blaschko’s lines</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0555">   a pattern of cutaneous mosaicism that can be observed in a range of congenital and acquired skin conditions.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0560">   <span class="italic">Alfred Blaschko (1858–1892), German dermatologist, Berlin, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0300"><span class="bold">Bloom’s syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0565">   an inherited disorder characterized by short stature, sun-sensitive skin changes, an increased risk of cancer, and other health problems (Bloom D 1954 Congenital telangiectatic erythema resembling lupus erythematosus in dwarfs; probably a syndrome entity. AMA Am J Dis Child 88:754–8).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0570">   <span class="italic">David Bloom, American dermatologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0305"><span class="bold">Bochdalek, triangle of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0575">   when present, the lumbocostal triangle of Bochdalek represents a developmental defect resulting from an incomplete formation of the pleuroperitoneal membrane, located in the posterolateral respiratory diaphragm between the lumbar and costal parts, superior to the lateral arcuate ligament;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0310"><span class="bold">Bochdalek’s hernia</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0580">   a congenital diaphragmatic hernia due to failure of closure of the pleuroperitoneal hiatus.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0585">   <span class="italic">Vincent Alexander Bochdalek (1801–1883), Czech anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0315"><span class="bold">Boerhaave’s syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0590">   spontaneous rupture of the oesophagus, first described in 1723; the patient was Baron Jan von Wassenaer, Grand Admiral of the Dutch Fleet and Prefect of Rhineland.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0595">   <span class="italic">Herman Boerhaave (1668–1738), Dutch physician, anatomist, botanist, chemist and humanist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0320"><span class="bold">Bolk’s ansiform lobules</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0600">   formerly known as the superior and inferior semilunar lobules in the cerebellum.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0605">   <span class="italic">Lodewijk Bolk (1866–1930), Dutch anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0325"><span class="bold">Bowman’s: anterior limiting lamina, layer</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0610">   the anterior elastic membrane of the cornea;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0330"><span class="bold">capsule</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0615">   the sheath surrounding the renal glomerulus;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0335"><span class="bold">glands</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0620">   glands in the olfactory mucosa.</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0340"><span class="bold">space</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0630">   the space between the two walls of Bowman’s capsule, also called the urinary space.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0635">   <span class="italic">Sir William Bowman (1816–1892), surgeon, Birmingham General Hospital, then Professor of Anatomy and Physiology, King’s College Hospital, London, UK.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0345"><span class="bold">Braille text</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0640">   a system of writing consisting of raised dots and points, which can be interpreted by touch as letters of the alphabet.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0645">   <span class="italic">Louis Braille (1809–1852), French teacher of the blind.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0350"><span class="bold">Brissaud’s sulcus</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0650">   the transverse parietal sulcus.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0655">   <span class="italic">Édouard Brissaud (1852–1909), French physician and pathologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0355"><span class="bold">Broca lesion</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0660">   anteroinferior detachment of the glenoid labrum (Broca A, Hartman H 1890 Contribution à l’étude des luxations de l’épaule (luxations anciennes, luxations recidivantes). Bulletins de La Société Anatomique de Paris 5, serie IV, 312–36. June 1890).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0665">   <span class="italic">Auguste Broca (1859–1924), French orthopaedic surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0360"><span class="bold">Broca’s</span>: <span class="bold">area</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0670">   the speech area of the cerebral cortex;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0365"><span class="bold">diagonal band</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0675">   a fibre tract in the basal forebrain;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0370"><span class="bold">plis de passage moyen de Broca</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0680">   Broca described several passages or bridges connecting the frontal and parietal lobes in the vicinity of the central sulcus. The pli de passage fronto-parietal moyen is an elevation in the floor of the central sulcus at its midpoint, constant and occasionally duplicated.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0685">   <span class="italic">Pierre Paul Broca (1824–1880), Professor of Clinical Surgery, Paris, France.</span><span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E149" id="pagebreak_1.464E149"/><a id="pg1464e.147"/></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0375"><span class="bold">Brödel, bloodless line of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0690">   the line of division between the areas of kidney supplied by the anterior and posterior branches of the renal artery.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0695">   <span class="italic">Max Brödel (1870–1941), medical artist, Leipzig, Germany, then Director of Institute of Art as Applied to Medicine, Baltimore, USA.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0380"><span class="bold">Brodmann’s area 17, area 18</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0700">   the primary visual cortex.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0705">   <span class="italic">Korbinian Brodmann (1868–1918), Professor of Anatomy, Tübingen, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0385"><span class="bold">Brown-Séquard syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0710">   an incomplete spinal cord lesion, characterized by ipsilateral upper motor neurone paralysis and loss of proprioception, as well as contralateral loss of pain and temperature sensation.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0715">   <span class="italic">Charles E Brown-Séquard (1817–1894), French physiologist and neurologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0390"><span class="bold">Broyles ligament</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0720">   the anterior commissure, commissural tendon. A band of fibrous tissue that extends from the vocal ligaments to the midline of the inner surface of the upper thyroid cartilage.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0725">   <span class="italic">Edwin N Broyles (1894–1977), American laryngologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0395">Bruch’s choroidal basal lamina, membrane</span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0730">   the basal membrane of the choroid.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0735">   <span class="italic">Karl Wilhelm Ludwig Bruch (1819–1884), Professor of Anatomy at Basle, Switzerland, and then Giessen, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0400"><span class="bold">Brunner’s glands</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0740">   duodenal glands lying deep to the muscularis mucosae.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0745">   <span class="italic">Johann Konrad Brunner (1653–1727), Professor of Anatomy successively at Heidelberg, Germany, and Strasbourg, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0405"><span class="bold">Buck’s fascia</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0750">   the penile fascial sheath.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0755">   <span class="italic">Gordon Buck (1807–1877), surgeon, New York, USA.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0410"><span class="bold">Budd–Chiari syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0760">   spontaneous thrombosis (complete or partial) of the hepatic veins, with or without additional inferior vena caval thrombosis.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0765">   <span class="italic">George Budd (1808–1882), Professor of Medicine, King’s College Hospital, London, UK; Hans Chiari (1851–1916), Austrian pathologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0415"><span class="bold">Budge (and Waller), ciliospinal centre of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0770">   neurones located in the intermediolateral cell columns of the spinal cord (C8–T2) that receive a pretectal input and project to the superior cervical ganglion, and are involved in controlling the operation of the ciliary muscle. Associated with a reflex identified by Augustus Volney Waller and Ludwig Julius Budge in 1852.</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0420"><span class="bold">Buerger’s disease</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0775">   thromboangiitis obliterans (an inflammatory vasculopathy).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0780">   <span class="italic">Leo Buerger (1879–1943), Austrian-born American physician and urologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0425"><span class="bold">Buford complex</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0785">   a combination of an absent anterior superior labrum and a cord-like middle glenohumeral ligament (Williams MM, Snyder SJ, Buford D 1994 The Buford complex – the cordlike middle glenohumeral ligament and absent anterosuperior labrum complex: a normal anatomic capsulolabral variant. Arthroscopy 10:241–7).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0790">   <span class="italic">Don Buford Jr, American orthopaedic surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0430"><span class="bold">Büngner, bands of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0795">   columns of denervated Schwann cells</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0800">   <span class="italic">Otto von Büngner (1858–1905), German surgeon. Studied in Dorpat, Estonia and Halle, Germany, from 1877 to 1883 as a student of Eduard von Wahl (1833–1890) and Richard von Volkmann (1830–1889).</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0435"><span class="bold">Bunnell tightness test</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0805">   tests the tightness of the intrinsic muscles of the hand. The metacarpophalangeal joint is held extended by the examiner and the proximal interphalangeal joint is passively flexed. An inability to flex the latter indicates that the intrinsic muscle is foreshortened.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0810">   <span class="italic">Sterling Bunnell, (1882–1957), American surgeon who is considered to be the ‘founding father’ of American hand surgery.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0440"><span class="bold">Burns, suprasternal space of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0815">   a slit-like interval between two layers of the deep investing fascia of the neck that are attached to the anterior and posterior borders of the manubrium. The space contains a small amount of areolar tissue, the lower parts of the anterior jugular veins and the jugular venous arch, the sternal heads of the sternocleidomastoid muscles and sometimes a lymph node.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0820">   <span class="italic">Allan Burns (1781–1813), Scottish anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0445"><span class="bold">Cajal</span>: <span class="bold">interstitial cells of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0825">   cells in the muscularis externa of the gut wall active as pacemakers in gut motility;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0450"><span class="bold">interstitial nucleus of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0830">   group of neurones lateral to the Edinger–Westphal nucleus and ventrolateral to the periaqueductal grey in the rostral part of the midbrain within the medial longitudinal fasciculus involved in the vestibulo-ocular response, smooth pursuit and optokinetic eye movements and vertical eye movement during saccades (Cajal, S Ramón Y 1911 Histologie du système nerveux de l’homme et des vertébrés. Paris: Maloine, pp. 263–266).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0455"><span class="bold">Cajal–Retzius cell</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0835">   ‘CR cell’, a class of neurones with different morphotypes that express Reln in the MZ/layer I.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0840">   <span class="italic">Santiago Ramón y Cajal (1852–1934), Professor of Anatomy, Valencia, then Barcelona, then Professor of Histology and Morbid Anatomy, Madrid, Spain; Cajal shared the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (1906) with Camillo Golgi for their work on the structure of the nervous system. Gustav Magnus Retzius (1842–1919), Professor of Anatomy, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. Son of Andreas Adolf Retzius.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0460"><span class="bold">Caldwell–Luc procedure</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0845">   an operation that involves opening the maxillary sinus by way of an incision into the supradental fossa opposite the premolar teeth, usually done to remove tooth roots or abnormal tissue.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0850">   <span class="italic">George W Caldwell (1867–1946), American physician, writer and painter; Henri Luc (1855–1925), French laryngologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0465"><span class="bold">Calleja, islands of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0855">   aggregations of very small, densely packed granule cell neurones located in the basal forebrain of most vertebrate species. They are found in all layers of the olfactory tubercle and between the tubercle and the ventral striatum.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0860">   <span class="italic">Julián Calleja y Sánchez (1836–1913), Spanish physician and anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0470"><span class="bold">Calot’s triangle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0865">   an isosceles triangle based on the common hepatic duct with the cystic artery and cystic duct forming its sides.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0870">   <span class="italic">Jean-François Calot (1861–1914), surgeon, Rothschild Hospital, Berck-sur-Mer, France. Specialized in the treatment of surgical tuberculosis in children.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0475"><span class="bold">Campbell’s lines</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0875">   five lines that should be traced when assessing a coronal radiograph of the facial skeleton (McGrigor B, Campbell W 1950 The radiology of war injuries. IV. Wounds of the face and jaw. Br J Radiol 23:685–96).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0480"><span class="bold">Camper’s: angle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0880">   the line running from the inferior border of the ala of the nose to the superior border of the tragus of the ear;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0485"><span class="bold">chiasm(a)</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0885">   the passage of the tendons of flexor digitorum profundus (flexor digitorum longus in the foot) through the interval left by the decussation of the fibres of the tendons of flexor digitorum superficialis (flexor digitorum brevis in the foot);</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0490"><span class="bold">fascia</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0890">   the layer of fascia extending between the ischiopubic rami inferior to sphincter urethrae and the deep transverse perineal muscle;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0495"><span class="bold">plane</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0895">   a plane defined by the inferior border of the right or left ala of the nose and the superior border of the tragus of both ears.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0900">   <span class="italic">Petrus Camper (1722–1789), Dutch physician and anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0500"><span class="bold">Cantlie’s line</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0905">   a line that separates the right and left lobes of the liver, drawn from the inferior vena cava to just left of the gallbladder fossa.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0910">   <span class="italic">Sir James Cantlie (1851–1926), Scottish physician, a pioneer of First Aid, and co-founder of the Hong Kong College of Medicine for Chinese (subsequently, the University of Hong Kong).</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0505"><span class="bold">Cantrell, pentalogy of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0915">   a syndrome of congenital defects involving the abdominal wall, sternum, diaphragm, pericardium and heart (Cantrell JR, Haller JA, Ravitch MM 1958 A syndrome of congenital defects involving the abdominal wall, sternum, diaphragm, pericardium, and heart. Surg Gynecol Obstet 107:602–14).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0510"><span class="bold">Carabelli’s cusp, cusplet, tubercle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0920">   an occasional fifth tubercle lingual to the anteromedial cusp of the first upper molar tooth.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0925">   <span class="italic">Edler Carabelli (1787–1842), Professor of Dental Surgery, Vienna, Austria.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0515"><span class="bold">Carnegie stage</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0930">   not an eponym but a standardized system of 23 stages used to provide a unified developmental chronology of the vertebrate embryo.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0935">   <span class="italic">Carnegie Institution for Science, organization established to support scientific research, Washington, DC, USA.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0520"><span class="bold">Carpenter’s syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0940">   mental retardation, acrocephaly and syndactyly related to, but genetically distinct from, Alpert’s syndrome.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0945">   <span class="italic">George Carpenter (1859–1910), physician, UK.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0525"><span class="bold">Carus, curve of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0950">   the lower end of the pelvic curve.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0955">   <span class="italic">Karl (Carl) Gustav Carus (1789–1869), German anatomist, physiologist and painter.</span><span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E150" id="pagebreak_1.464E150"/><a id="pg1464e.148"/></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0530"><span class="bold">Chamberlain procedure</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0960">   anterior mediastinotomy.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0965">   <span class="italic">J Maxwell Chamberlain (1906–1968), American thoracic surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0535"><span class="bold">Charcot’s artery of cerebral haemorrhage</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0970">   the lenticulostriate branch of the middle cerebral artery.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0975">   <span class="italic">Jean-Martin Charcot (1825–1893), neurologist and physician, Salpêtrière, Paris, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0540"><span class="bold">Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0980">   an inherited disorder of nerves that is characterized by loss of muscle tissue and touch sensation, predominantly in the feet and legs.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0985">   <span class="italic">Jean-Martin Charcot (1825–1893), French neurologist and physician, Salpêtrière, Paris, France; Pierre Marie (1853–1940), French neurologist, assistant to Charcot; Howard Henry Tooth (1856–1925), British neurologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0545"><span class="bold">Chassaignac’s carotid tubercle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p0990">   the prominent anterior tubercle of the transverse process of the sixth cervical vertebra, against which the carotid artery can be compressed.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p0995">   <span class="italic">Charles-Marie Édouard Chassaignac (1805–1879), surgeon, Paris, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0550"><span class="bold">Cheyne–Stokes respiration</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1000">   breathing pattern characterized by alternating periods of apnoea and hyperpnoea.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1005">   <span class="italic">John Cheyne (1777–1836), Scottish physician; William Stokes (1804–1878), Irish physician, Regius Professor of Physic at the University of Dublin.</span></div><div class="para_indented" id="p1010">   <span class="italic">Chiari malformation, Chiari’s network:</span></div><div class="para_indented" id="p1015">   <span class="italic">see</span> <span class="bold"><span class="italic">Arnold–Chiari malformation.</span></span></div><div class="para_indented" id="p1020">   <span class="italic">Hans Chiari (1851–1916), Austrian pathologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0555"><span class="bold">Chilaiditi’s syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1025">   the presence of a long mesentery related to the distal ascending and proximal transverse colon, resulting in the presence of either or both becoming interposed between the right lobe of the liver and the diaphragm, with or without abdominal symptoms.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1030">   <span class="italic">Demetrius Chilaiditi (1883–1975), Greek radiologist in Vienna, Austria.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0560"><span class="bold">Chopart: joint</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1035">   the transverse tarsal joint or midtarsal joint formed by the calcaneocuboid and talonavicular joints;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0565"><span class="bold">Chopart’s ligament</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1040">   the bifurcate ligament (calcaneonavicular ligament and calcaneocuboid ligament).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1045">   <span class="italic">François Chopart (1743–1795), French surgeon. Professor of Practical Surgery at the École Pratique, Paris, France, from 1771; in 1782, he succeeded Toussaint Bordenave (1728–1782) as Chair of Physiology.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0570"><span class="bold">Clara cells</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1050">   bronchiolar cells secreting surfactant. This is now regarded as a ‘tainted eponym’. Max Clara acknowledged that the sample on which he based his work ‘was obtained from a prisoner executed by the Nazi justice system’.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1055">   <span class="italic">Max Clara (1899–1966), Professor of Anatomy, Leipzig, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0575"><span class="bold">Clarke’s column</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1060">   the basal nucleus in the posterior horn of spinal grey matter.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1065">   <span class="italic">Jacob Augustus Lockhart Clarke (1817–1880), neurologist, Hospital for Epilepsy and Paralysis, London, UK.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0580"><span class="bold">Claudius’ cells</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1070">   supporting cells on the floor of the cochlear canal of the inner ear.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1075">   <span class="italic">Friedrich Matthias Claudius (1822–1869), Professor of Anatomy successively in Kiel and Marburg, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0585"><span class="bold">Cleland’s ligament, transverse retrovascular ligament</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1080">   thin fibres passing from the lateral surfaces of the interphalangeal joints to the skin of the fingers.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1085">   <span class="italic">John Cleland (1835–1925), Professor of Anatomy, Glasgow, UK.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0590"><span class="bold">Cloquet’s node, gland</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1090">   a lymph node in the femoral canal.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1095">   <span class="italic">Jules-Germain Cloquet (1790–1883), Professor of Anatomy and Surgery, Paris, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0595"><span class="bold">Colles’: fascia</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1100">   a continuation of Scarpa’s layer of abdominal fascia;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0600"><span class="bold">fracture</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1105">   a fracture of the lower end of the radius with dorsal displacement.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1110">   <span class="italic">Abraham Colles (1773–1843), Professor of Anatomy and Surgery, Royal College of Surgeons of Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0605"><span class="bold">Conn syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1115">   a disorder of excessive aldosterone production.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1120">   <span class="italic">Jerome W Conn (1907–1994), American endocrinologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0610"><span class="bold">Cooper’s: pectineal ligament</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1125">   thickened periosteum on the pecten pubis;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0615"><span class="bold">suspensory ligaments</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1130">   suspensory ligaments of the breast.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1135">   <span class="italic">Sir Astley Pastor Cooper (1768–1841), surgeon, Guy’s Hospital, London, UK.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0620"><span class="bold">Corti: organ of, rods of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1140">   auditory hair cells of the cochlea;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0625"><span class="bold">tunnel of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1145">   the tunnel between the internal and external pillar cells in the inner ear.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1150">   <span class="italic">Alfonso Corti (1822–1888), histologist. Held no academic post but worked in Vienna, Austria; Berlin, Germany; Utrecht, Netherlands; and Turin, Italy.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0630"><span class="bold">Cowper’s glands</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1155">   the bulbo-urethral glands.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1160">   <span class="italic">William Cowper (1666–1709), British surgeon and anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0635"><span class="bold">Crouzon’s syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1165">   craniofacial dysostosis. Premature closures of cranial vault sutures, maxillary hypoplasia and ocular and aural anomalies.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1170">   <span class="italic">Octave Crouzon (1874–1938), neurologist, Salpêtrière, Paris, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0640"><span class="bold">Cullen’s sign</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1175">   bluish discoloration at the umbilicus from extravasated blood in ruptured ectopic pregnancy and pancreatitis – an uncommon physical sign.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1180">   <span class="italic">Thomas Cullen (1869–1953), Professor of Gynaecology, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, USA.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0645"><span class="bold">Cunningham, sulcus precentralis medialis of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1185">   the medial precentral sulcus in the cerebral cortex.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1190">   <span class="italic">Daniel John Cunningham (1850–1909), Scottish anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0650"><span class="bold">Cupid’s bow</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1195">   the upper curl of the lip, which resembles Cupid’s bow.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1200">   <span class="italic">Cupid, the Roman god of love, pictured as a winged boy with a bow.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0655"><span class="bold">Cusco’s speculum</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1205">   a bivalved, self-retaining speculum used to inspect the cervix.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1210">   <span class="italic">Edward Gabriel Cusco (1819–1894), French surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0660"><span class="bold">Cushing’s syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1215">   the syndrome produced by glucocorticosteroid excess.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1220">   <span class="italic">Harvey Cushing (1869–1939), Professor of Surgery, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts; neurosurgeon, Peter Bent Brigham Hospital, Boston, USA.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0665"><span class="bold">Cuvier, duct of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1225">   the termination of the cardinal vein in the fetus.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1230">   <span class="italic">Baron Georges Cuvier (1760–1832), zoologist and palaeontologist, Paris, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0670"><span class="bold">Dandy–Walker malformation</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1235">   a variant of Arnold–Chiari syndrome involving the fourth ventricle and cerebellum.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1240">   <span class="italic">Walter Edward Dandy (1886–1946), American neurosurgeon, pioneer in surgery of the posterior skull cavity and intracranial vascular surgery; Arthur Earl Walker (1907–1995), American neurologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0675"><span class="bold">Danon disease</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1245">   a condition characterized by cardiomyopathy, myopathy and intellectual disability; attributed to mutations in the LAMP2 gene (Danon MJ, Oh SJ, DiMauro S et al 1981 Lysosomal glycogen storage disease with normal acid maltase. Neurology 31:51–7).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0680"><span class="bold">Darkschewitsch, nucleus of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1250">   the posterior commissural nucleus.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1255">   <span class="italic">Liverij Osipovich Darkschewitsch (1858–1925), neuroanatomist, University of Moscow, Russia.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0685"><span class="bold">Darwin’s tubercle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1260">   a slight projection that may be present on the posterior superior aspect of the helix of the pinna (auricle) of the external ear.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1265">   <span class="italic">Charles Robert Darwin (1809–1882), English naturalist, author of On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0690"><span class="bold">DeBakey classification</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1270">   a system used to classify aortic dissections based upon the site of origin of the dissection. Dissections that include the aorta proximal to the left subclavian artery, with or without distal extension, are classified as type I or II. Dissections distal to the left subclavian artery are classified as type IIIa (extend to the respiratory diaphragm) or IIIb (extend below the respiratory diaphragm).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1275">   <span class="italic">Michael Ellis DeBakey (1908–2008), American cardiovascular surgeon and pioneer in surgical procedures for treatment of defects and diseases of the cardiovascular system.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0695"><span class="bold">Deiters’: nucleus</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1280">   the lateral vestibular nucleus of the vestibulocochlear nerve;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0700"><span class="bold">phalangeal supporting cells</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1285">   outer hair cells in the organ of Corti.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1290">   <span class="italic">Otto Friedrich Karl Deiters (1834–1863), Professor of Anatomy and Histology, Bonn, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0705"><span class="bold">Delphian node</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1295">   prelaryngeal (anterior to larynx) lymph node(s), located just above the thyroid isthmus. They may harbour metastatic disease and should be routinely removed as part of a central neck dissection.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1300">   <span class="italic">Greek Oracle of Delphi, who could predict the future, because the presence of metastatic disease in these lymph nodes predicted that further nodal disease was present in the neck and that the patient had a worse cancer prognosis.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0710"><span class="bold">Denonvilliers’ fascia</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1305">   the fascia separating the prostate from the rectum.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1310">   <span class="italic">Charles-Pierre Denonvilliers (1808–1872), Professor of Anatomy, Paris, France.</span><span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E151" id="pagebreak_1.464E151"/><a id="pg1464e.149"/></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0715"><span class="bold">de Quervain’s tenovaginitis, tenosynovitis</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1315">   stenosing tenovaginitis of the tendon sheath of abductor pollicis longus and extensor pollicis brevis.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1320">   <span class="italic">Fritz de Quervain (1868–1940), Professor of Surgery, Berne, Switzerland.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0720">Descemet’s posterior limiting lamina, layer, membrane</span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1325">   the posterior membrane of the cornea.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1330">   <span class="italic">Jean Descemet (1732–1810), Professor of Anatomy and Surgery, Paris, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0725"><span class="bold">Dieulafoy lesion</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1335">   rare cause of recurrent gastrointestinal bleeding from ectatic submucosal vessels in the intestinal mucosa.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1340">   <span class="italic">Paul Georges Dieulafoy (1839–1911), French physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0730"><span class="bold">DiGeorge syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1345">   a congenital disorder in which defective development of the third and fourth pharyngeal pouches results in hypoplasia or aplasia of the thymus and parathyroid glands.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1350">   <span class="italic">Angelo Mario DiGeorge (1921–2009), American paediatrician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0735"><span class="bold">Dingman approach</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1355">   a popular method for repairing zygomatic complex fractures (Dingman RO, Natvig P 1964 Surgery of Facial Fractures. Philadelphia: WB Saunders).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0740"><span class="bold">Disse, perisinusoidal space of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1360">   the space between the venous sinusoid and the hepatic cells.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1365">   <span class="italic">Josef Disse (1852–1912), German anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0745"><span class="bold">Doppler effect</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1370">   a change in frequency of an incident sound (or light) wave related to the difference in velocity between the sender and receiver (Doppler CA 1843 Über das farbige Licht der Doppelsterne und einiger anderer Gestirne des Himmels. Abh Königl Böhm Ges Wiss 2:465–82).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1375">   <span class="italic">Christian Andreas Doppler (1803–1853), Austrian mathematician and physicist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0750"><span class="bold">Dorello’s canal</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1380">   the invagination of the dura in the petroclival region from the petroclival entrance point to the posterior end of the cavernous sinus. It conveys the mid portion of the abducens nerve.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1385">   <span class="italic">Primo Dorello, Italian anatomist is credited with the discovery of the canal that bears his name in 1905, although it had been described in 1859 by Wenzel Leopold Gruber. Dorello was Professor of Human Anatomy at Peruggia (1926–1946).</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0755"><span class="bold">Douglas: arcuate line of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1390">   the arcuate line of the sheath of rectus abdominis;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0760"><span class="bold">pouch of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1395">   the rectouterine peritoneal pouch.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1400">   <span class="italic">James Douglas (1675–1742), anatomist and obstetrician, London, UK.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0765"><span class="bold">Down’s syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1405">   trisomy 21, producing mental retardation and a characteristic facies with variable additional abnormalities.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1410">   <span class="italic">John Langdon Haydon Down (1828–1896), Cornish physician, UK.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0770"><span class="bold">Drummond, marginal artery of, arch of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1415">   the anastomoses between the ileocolic, right colic, middle colic, left colic and sigmoid arteries (the arc of Riolan is the part of this arch between the middle and left colic artery).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1420">   <span class="italic">Hamilton Drummond (1882–1925), surgeon, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0775"><span class="bold">Duchenne muscular dystrophy</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1425">   chronic progressive muscular atrophy due to mutations in the dystrophin gene.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1430">   <span class="italic">Guillaume Benjamin Amand Duchenne de Boulogne (1806–1875), French neurologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0780"><span class="bold">Dunbar syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1435">   external compression of the coeliac trunk by the median arcuate ligament. The symptoms include abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting (aka median arcuate ligament syndrome (MALS), coeliac artery compression syndrome, coeliac axis syndrome, coeliac trunk compression syndrome, Harjola–Marable syndrome, Marable syndrome) (Dunbar JD, Molnar W, Beman FF, Marable SA 1965 Compression of the celiac trunk and abdominal angina. Am J Roentgenol Radium Ther Nucl Med 95:731–44).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0785"><span class="bold">Dupuytren’s disease, contracture</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1440">   contraction and fibrosis of the palmar (and, occasionally, the plantar) fascia.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1445">   <span class="italic">Baron Guillaume Dupuytren (1777–1835), surgeon, Hôtel Dieu, Paris, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0790"><span class="bold">Eagle’s syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1450">   an elongated and/or calcified styloid process and/or a calcified stylohyoid ligament impinge on local structures, triggering sudden sharp pain, e.g. when swallowing.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1455">   <span class="italic">Watt Weems Eagle (1898–1980), American otorhinolaryngologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0795"><span class="bold">Eberstaller: sulcus precentralis medialis of, diagonal sulcus of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1460">   (Eberstaller, O 1884 Zür Oberflachen Anatomie der Grosshirn Hemisphären. Vienna: Med. 7. Eberstaller O 1890 Das Stirnhirn. Vienna: Urban &amp; Schwartzenberg).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0800"><span class="bold">Ebstein malformation</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1465">   a rare congenital cardiac malformation where the septal and inferior tricuspid valve leaflets are attached abnormally deep into the right ventricular chamber.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1470">   <span class="italic">Wilhelm Ebstein (1836–1912), German physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0805"><span class="bold">Ecker</span>: <span class="bold">gyrus descendens of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1475">   a gyrus that encircles the retrocalcarine sulcus;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0810"><span class="bold">paracentral lobule of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1480">   a division of the medial aspect of the cerebral cortex formed by the anterior and the posterior paracentral gyri. It lies above the cingulate sulcus and is bounded by the paracentral sulcus anteriorly and the marginal part of the cingulate sulcus posteriorly.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1485">   <span class="italic">Johann Alexander Ecker (1816–1887), German anthropologist and anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0815"><span class="bold">Edinger–Westphal nucleus</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1490">   the midbrain nucleus containing preganglionic neurones destined to synapse in the ciliary ganglion; it lies close to the nucleus of the oculomotor nerve.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1495">   <span class="italic">Ludwig Edinger (1855–1918), Professor of Anatomy, Frankfurt-am-Main, German; Karl Westphal (1833–1890), Professor of Psychiatry, Berlin, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0820"><span class="bold">Ehlers–Danlos syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1500">   a group of rare genetic disorders affecting humans and domestic animals, caused by a defect in collagen synthesis.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1505">   <span class="italic">Edward Ehlers of Denmark (1863–1937) and Henri-Alexandre Danlos of France (1844–1912) identified the syndrome at the turn of the twentieth century.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0825"><span class="bold">Eisenmenger complex</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1510">   the combination of ventricular septal defect with pulmonary hypertension and consequent right-to-left shunt through the defect, with or without an associated overriding aorta.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1515">   <span class="italic">Victor Eisenmenger (1864–1932), German physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0830"><span class="bold">Elliot Smith, paramesial sulcus of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1520">   paramesial sulcus, certebral cortex.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1525">   <span class="italic">Sir Grafton Elliot Smith (1871–1937), Australian anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0835"><span class="bold">Ellis–van Creveld syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1530">   a very rare autosomal recessive skeletal dysplasia, with inter- and intra-familial variability, characterized by short ribs, short limbs, postaxial polydactyly, and dysplastic teeth and nails. Congenital heart defects occur in 60% of the individuals (Ellis RWB, van Crefeld S 1940 A syndrome characterized by ectodermal dysplasia, polydactyly, chondro-dysplasia and congenital morbus cardis. Arch Dis Child 15:65–84).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0840"><span class="bold">Elschnig’s layer</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1535">   the astroglial membrane at the optic nerve head, continuous with the internal limiting membrane of the retina.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1540">   <span class="italic">Anton Elschnig (1863–1939), Professor, University of Prague Eye Clinic, Czech Republic.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0845"><span class="bold">Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1545">   an X-linked form of muscular dystrophy (Emery AE, Dreifuss FE 1966 Unusual type of benign X-linked muscular dystrophy. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatr 29:338–42).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0850"><span class="bold">Epley’s manoeuvre</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1550">   canalith repositioning for benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (Epley JM 1980 New dimensions of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 88:599–605).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0855"><span class="bold">Erb’s point</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1555">   a point on the side of the neck 2–3 cm above the clavicle and in front of the transverse process of the sixth cervical vertebra. Pressure over this point elicits Duchenne–Erb paralysis, and electrical stimulation over this area causes various arm muscles to contract.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1560">   <span class="italic">Wilhelm Erb (1840–1921), Professor of Neurology, Heidelberg, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0860"><span class="bold">Erb–Duchenne paralysis</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1565">   the result of injury to the C5 and C6 roots of the brachial plexus.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1570">   <span class="italic">Wilhelm Erb (1840–1921), Professor of Neurology, Heidelberg, Germany; Guillaume Benjamin Amand Duchenne de Boulogne (1806–1875), French neurologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0865"><span class="bold">Essex–Lopresti injury</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1575">   fractures of the radial head with distal radio-ulnar dislocation (Essex-Lopresti P 1951 Fractures of the radial head with distal radio-ulnar dislocation: report of two cases. J Bone Joint Surg Br 33:244–247).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0870"><span class="bold">Eustachian: tube</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1580">   the pharyngotympanic tube;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0875"><span class="bold">valve</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1585">   the inferior vena caval valve in the right atrium.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1590">   <span class="italic">Bartolomeo Eustachi (1513–1574), Professor of Anatomy, Rome, Italy, and physician to the Pope.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0880"><span class="bold">Fallopian: aqueduct, canal</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1595">   the canal for the facial nerve in the temporal bone;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0885"><span class="bold">tube</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1600">   the uterine tube.<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E152" id="pagebreak_1.464E152"/><a id="pg1464e.150"/></span><div class="para_indented" id="p1605">   <span class="italic">Gabrielle Fallopio (1523–1562), Professor of Anatomy, Padua, Italy. A pupil of Vesalius.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0890"><span class="bold">Fallot’s tetralogy</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1610">   a congenital heart disease comprising pulmonary stenosis, right ventricular hypertrophy, ventricular septal defect and overriding of the aorta.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1615">   <span class="italic">Étienne-Louis Fallot (1850–1911), Professor of Medicine, Marseilles, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0895"><span class="bold">Fañanas cells</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1620">   astroglial subtypes in the deeper molecular layer of the cerebellum (Fañanas JRY 1916 Contribucion al estudo de la neuroglia del cerebelo. Trab Lab Invest Biol (Madrid) 14:163–179).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1625">   <span class="italic">Jorge Ramon y Cajal Fananas (1886–?) Spanish physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0900"><span class="bold">Ferguson reflex</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1630">   enhancement of uterine activity due to mechanical stretching of the lower uterine segment and cervix (Ferguson JKW 1941 A study of the motility of the intact uterus at term. Surg Gynecol Obstet 73:359–66).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1635">   <span class="italic">James Ferguson, Canadian obstetrician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0905"><span class="bold">Fitz-Hugh–Curtis syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1640">   a rare complication of pelvic inflammatory disease involving the liver capsule and leading to the creation of adhesions. Thomas Fitz-Hugh, Jr and Arthur Hale Curtis first reported this condition in 1934 and 1930, respectively.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1645">   <span class="italic">Arthur Hale ‘Art’ Curtis (1881–1955), American football player, coach and gynaecologist.</span></div><div class="para_indented" id="p1650">   <span class="italic">Thomas Fitz-Hugh (1894–1963), American haematologist.</span></div><div class="para_indented" id="p1655">   <span class="bold">Fleschig’s temporal knee:</span></div><div class="para_indented" id="p1660">   <span class="italic">see</span> <a href="#def2035"><span class="bold"><span class="italic">Meyer’s loop</span></span></a>.</div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0910"><span class="bold">Fordyce spots</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1665">   small mucosal cysts of the cheeks, lips and tongue.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1670">   <span class="italic">John Addison Fordyce (1858–1925), dermatologist, New York, USA.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0915"><span class="bold">Forel, H field of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1675">   ventral tegmental decussation between the red nuclei.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1680">   <span class="italic">August Forel (1848–1931), anatomist and neurologist, Zurich, Switzerland.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0920"><span class="bold">Foville, quadrangular lobule of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1685">   the precuneus (part of the medial portion of the parietal lobe), delineated anteriorly by the marginal branch of the cingulate sulcus, posteriorly by the parieto-occipital sulcus, and inferiorly by multiple Y-shaped sulcal segments that constitute the subparietal sulcus.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1690">   <span class="italic">Achille Louis François Foville (1799–1878), French neurologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0925"><span class="bold">Fox’s sign</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1695">   ecchymosis of the inguinal ligament due to blood tracking from the retroperitoneum and collecting at the inguinal ligament in haemorrhagic pancreatitis.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1700">   <span class="italic">George Henry Fox (1846–1937), American dermatologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0930"><span class="bold">Fox–Fordyce disease</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1705">   a chronic, papular disease involving apocrine sweat duct obstruction, e.g. in the axilla.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1710">   <span class="italic">George Henry Fox (1846–1937), American dermatologist; John Addison Fordyce (1858–1925), American dermatologist (see</span> <span class="italic"><span class="bold">Fordyce spots)</span></span>.</div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0935"><span class="bold">Freiberg’s infraction</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1715">   osteochondrosis of a metatarsal head, usually the second (more rarely, third or fourth) metatarsal bone of the foot, presenting the picture of subchondral cancellous bone necrosis. Characterized by localized pain and swelling over the metatarsal head, red overlying skin and limitation of movement in an adolescent. X-rays show the head to be crushed and fragmented.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1720">   <span class="italic">Albert Henry Freiberg (1868–1940), American surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0940"><span class="bold">Frey’s syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1725">   sweating in the distribution of the auriculotemporal nerve, triggered by eating (‘auriculo-gustatory sweating’) after injury to the facial nerve.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1730">   <span class="italic">Lucja Frey (1889–1944), neurologist, Warsaw, Poland.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0945"><span class="bold">Frohse (Fröhse), arcade of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1735">   an arcade between the two layers of supinator, that transmits the posterior interosseous nerve.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1740">   <span class="italic">Fritz Frohse (1871–1916), German anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0950"><span class="bold">Fröhlich’s syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1745">   adiposogenital dystrophy.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1750">   <span class="italic">Alfred Fröhlich (1871–1953), Austrian pharmacologist in the USA.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0955"><span class="bold">Froment’s sign</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1755">   weakness of adductor pollicis and the first dorsal interosseous substantially degrades pinch strength. Froment’s sign is positive when a slip of paper is held in the key pinch position between the pulp of the thumb and the radial side of the index proximal interphalangeal joint, and the tip of the thumb involuntarily flexes as flexor pollicis longus contracts to compensate for the absent adductor pollicis and first dorsal interosseous.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1760">   <span class="italic">Jules Froment (1878–1946), French neurologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0960"><span class="bold">Fruchaud, myopectineal orifice of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1765">   the surgical name given to the inferomedial aspect of the anterior abdominal wall.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1770">   <span class="italic">Henri Rene Fruchaud (1894–1960), Professor of Clinical Surgery, Angers.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0965"><span class="bold">Fuchs, crypts of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1775">   large depressions often found on the anterior surface of the iris.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1780">   <span class="italic">Ernst Fuchs (1851–1930), Austrian ophthalmologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0970"><span class="bold">Furnas’ ligament</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1785">   retaining ligaments of the cheek (Furnas DW 1989 The retaining ligaments of the cheek. Plast Reconstr Surg 83:11–16).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1790">   <span class="italic"><span class="bold">Futcher’s lines:</span></span></div><div class="para_indented" id="p1795">   <span class="italic">see</span> <a href="#def3095"><span class="bold"><span class="italic">Voigt’s lines</span></span></a>.</div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0975"><span class="bold">Galeazzi fracture-dislocation</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1800">   a fracture of the distal part of the radius with dislocation of distal radio-ulnar joint and an intact ulna.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1805">   <span class="italic">Riccardo Galeazzi (1866–1952), Italian orthopaedic surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0980"><span class="bold">Galen’s: nerve, anastomosis (ansa galeni)</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1810">   the anastomosis between the internal branch of the superior laryngeal nerve and the recurrent laryngeal nerve in the wall of the laryngopharynx;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0985">vein (deep galenic venous system)</span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1815">   the great cerebral vein.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1820">   <span class="italic">Claudius Galen (130–200 AD), born Pergamum, Asia Minor, studied there and in Smyrna, Corinth and Alexandria. Physician to Marcus Aurelius and teacher of anatomy and medicine in Rome. Author of numerous texts on anatomy, surgery and medicine.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0990"><span class="bold">Gans, fissure of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1825">   a structure that lies on the undersurface of the right lobe of the liver behind the gallbladder fossa; it often marks the variable site of division of the portal pedicle to the right posterior sector.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1830">   <span class="italic">Henry Gans (1925–2017), Dutch surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def0995"><span class="bold">Gartner’s: cyst</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1835">   usually a benign cyst in the anterolateral wall of the vaginal remnant of Gartner’s duct;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1000"><span class="bold">duct</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1840">   the paravaginal duct; a mesonephric duct remnant.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1845">   <span class="italic">Hermann Treschow Gartner (1785–1827), surgeon in the Norwegian and then Danish armies.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1005"><span class="bold">Gasserian ganglion</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1850">   sensory ganglion of the trigeminal nerve. The ganglion was described in 1765 by Antonius Hirsh, who named it after his teacher.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1855">   <span class="italic">Johann Lorentz Gasser (1723–1765), Austrian anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1010"><span class="bold">Gennari, stria of, white line of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1860">   a white band or stripe in the occipital cortex.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1865">   <span class="italic">Francesco Gennari (1750–1797), anatomist, Parma, Italy.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1015"><span class="bold">Gerdy’s tubercle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1870">   the attachment of the iliotibial tract to the proximal tibia.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1875">   <span class="italic">Pierre Nicolas Gerdy (1797–1856), surgeon and pathologist, Paris, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1020"><span class="bold">Gerota’s fascia</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1880">   the renal fascia, which encapsulates the perinephric fat.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1885">   <span class="italic">Dumitru Gerota (1867–1939), Professor of Surgery, Bucharest, Romania.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1025"><span class="bold">Geschwind’s area/territory/region</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1890">   a region in the inferior parietal lobule.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1895">   <span class="italic">Norman Geschwind (1926–1984), American behavioural neurologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1030"><span class="bold">Giacomini, band of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1900">   the band on the surface of the uncus.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1905">   <span class="italic">Carlo Giacomini (1840–1898), Professor of Anatomy, Turin, Italy.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1035"><span class="bold">Giemsa staining</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1910">   a solution containing azure-II, glycerin and methanol. Stained elements appear pink, purple or blue.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1915">   <span class="italic">Gustav Giemsa (1867–1948), German chemist and bacteriologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1040"><span class="bold">Gillies approach, flap, operation</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1920">   a procedure in which the instrument is inserted deep to the deep lamina of temporalis fascia through a scalp incision and used to elevate depressed zygomatic complex fractures.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1925">   <span class="italic">Sir Harold Delf Gillies (1882–1960), British plastic surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1045"><span class="bold">Giraldes, organ of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1930">   a vestige of the Wolffian body on the posterior aspect of the testicle.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1935">   <span class="italic">Joaquim Albino Cardoso Casado Giraldes (1808–1875), Portuguese anatomist and surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1050"><span class="bold">Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1940">   a hereditary platelet abnormality characterized by defective clot retraction, prolonged bleeding time, and related symptoms such as epistaxis and inappropriate bleeding.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1945">   <span class="italic">Eduard Glanzmann (1887–1959), Swiss paediatrician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1055"><span class="bold">Glenn shunt</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1950">   a surgical operation for children born with cyanotic heart disease, in which the superior vena cava is anastomosed to the right pulmonary artery so that blood bypasses the malformed right chambers of the heart and is shunted directly into the lungs to be oxygenated.<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E153" id="pagebreak_1.464E153"/><a id="pg1464e.151"/></span><div class="para_indented" id="p1955">   <span class="italic">William WL Glenn (1914–2003), Chief of Cardiovascular Surgery, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1060">Glisson’s (Glissonian) capsule, sheath</span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1960">   the fibrous capsule of the liver.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1965">   <span class="italic">Francis Glisson (1597–1677), Regius Professor of Medicine, Cambridge, UK. Described rickets in 1671.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1065"><span class="bold">Goethe, ossicle of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1970">   the incus (an auditory ossicle).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1975">   <span class="italic">Johann Wolfgang Goethe (1749–1832), German poet, philosopher and scientist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1070"><span class="bold">Goldenhaar’s syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1980">   hemifacial microsomia. A syndrome of dermoid cysts, auricular appendices, asymmetrical malformations of the face, and vertebral abnormalities.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p1985">   <span class="italic">Maurice Goldenhaar (1924–2001), American physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1075"><span class="bold">Golgi: cells, neurones</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1990">   GABAergic cerebellar interneurones;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1080"><span class="bold">complexes, apparatus, bodies</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p1995">   membranous cellular organelles or vesicles;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1085"><span class="bold">corpuscles</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2000">   tactile end organs in skin and muscle;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1090"><span class="bold">staining technique</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2005">   a silver staining method for neurones;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1095"><span class="bold">tendon organ</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2010">   a proprioceptive sensory nerve ending embedded among the fibres of a tendon.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2015">   <span class="italic">Camillo Golgi (1844–1926), Professor of Histology and Anatomy successively in Padua and then Siena, Italy; shared the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (1906) with Ramon Santiago y Cajal for their work on the structure of the nervous system.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1100"><span class="bold">Goodpasture’s syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2020">   an autoimmune condition in which autoantibodies damage basal laminae, primarily affecting renal and lung function.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2025">   <span class="italic">Ernest William Goodpasture (1886–1960), pathologist, Tennessee, USA.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1105"><span class="bold">Gorlin syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2030">   nevoid basal-cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCC syndrome).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2035">   <span class="italic">Robert J Gorlin (1923–2006), American oral pathologist and human geneticist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1110"><span class="bold">Graafian follicle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2040">   the mature ovarian follicle.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2045">   <span class="italic">Regnier de Graaf (1641–1673), Dutch anatomist and physician, Delft, Netherlands.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1115"><span class="bold">Grapow, vertical bands of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2050">   vertical connections between the palmar skin and palmar aponeurosis (Grapow M 1887 Die Anatomie und physiologische Anatomie der Palmaraponeurose. Arch Anat Physiol 2–3:143–58).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1120"><span class="bold"><span class="italic">Gratiolet, ‘pli de passage’ of</span></span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2055">   Gratiolet introduced the term plis de passage for some interconnecting gyri in the cerebral cortex.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2060">   <span class="italic">Louis-Pierre Gratiolet (1815–1865), anatomist and zoologist, became Professor of Zoology, Paris, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1125"><span class="bold">Graves’ disease</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2065">   a disorder of the thyroid, usually of autoimmune aetiology, characterized by at least two of the following: hyperthyroidism, goitre and exophthalmos.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2070">   <span class="italic">Robert James Graves (1796–1853), Irish physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1130"><span class="bold">Grayson’s ligament</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2075">   fascial fibres that pass from the lateral sides of the phalanges volar to the neurovascular bundle (Grayson J 1941 The cutaneous ligaments of the digits. J Anat 75:164–75).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2080">   <span class="italic">J Grayson, Professor of Anatomy, Manchester, UK.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1135"><span class="bold">Grey Turner’s sign</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2085">   bluish discoloration in the left loin caused by extravasated blood in acute pancreatitis – an uncommon physical sign.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2090">   <span class="italic">George Grey Turner (1877–1951), surgeon, Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle upon Tyne, and Professor of Surgery, Royal Postgraduate Medical School, Hammersmith, London, UK.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1140"><span class="bold"><span class="italic">Gruber, petrosphenoidal ligament of</span></span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2095">   a ligament that spans between the petrous apex and the posterior clinoid process, between the meningeal and periosteal layers of the dura mater; the insertion and thickness of the ligament may vary <span class="italic">(see also</span> <a href="#def0750"><span class="bold">Dorello’s canal</span></a>).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2100">   <span class="italic">Wenzel Leopold Gruber (1814–1890), Russian anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1145"><span class="bold">Guérin’s fracture</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2105">   a Le Fort I level fracture of the maxilla.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2110">   <span class="italic">Alphonse Guérin (1816–1895), surgeon, Paris, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1150"><span class="bold">Guillain–Barré syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2115">   acute idiopathic polyneuritis.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2120">   <span class="italic">Georges Guillain (1876–1951), French neurologist; Jean Alexandre Barré (1880–1967), French neurologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1155"><span class="bold">Guillain-Mollaret triangle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2125">   dentato-rubro-olivary circuit.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2130">   <span class="italic">Georges Charles Guillain (1876–1961), French neurologist; Pierre Mollaret (1898–1987), French physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1160"><span class="bold">Guyon’s canal</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2135">   the canal for the ulnar nerve and vessels; defined medially by the pisiform, and posteriorly by the flexor retinaculum.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2140">   <span class="italic">Jean Casimir Guyon (1831–1920), surgeon, Paris, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1165"><span class="bold">Haglund’s disease, syndrome, deformity</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2145">   an abnormal prominence of the posterior superior lateral aspect of the os calcis.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2150">   <span class="italic">Sims Emil Patrik Haglund (1870–1937), Swedish orthopaedic surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1170"><span class="bold">Haller’s: arches</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2155">   the medial and lateral arcuate ligaments (or lumbocostal arches);</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1175"><span class="bold">cells</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2160">   infraorbital ethmoidal cells (synonym: orbitoethmoidal cells), which may be specified as either anterior or posterior and which may lie lateral to the infundibulum and then open into the middle meatus. They grow into the bony orbital floor and may obstruct the ostia of either the ethmoidal infundibulum or the maxillary sinus during endonasal procedures;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1180"><span class="bold"><span class="italic">circle of, zonula of</span></span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2165">   <span class="italic">see</span> <span class="bold"><span class="italic">Zinn, circle of, zonula of;</span></span></span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1185"><span class="bold">layer</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2170">   a layer of large blood vessels in the choroid derived from the short posterior ciliary arteries.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2175">   <span class="italic">Victor Albrecht von Haller (1708–1777), Professor of Anatomy, Physiology, Surgery and Botany, University of Göttingen, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1190"><span class="bold">Hallermann–Streiff syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2180">   oculomandibulofacial syndrome.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2185">   <span class="italic">Wilhelm Hallermann (1909–2005), German ophthalmologist; Enrico Bernardo Streiff (1908–1988), Italian-Swiss ophthalmologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1195"><span class="bold"><span class="italic">Hallgren syndrome</span></span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2190">   <span class="italic">see</span> <a href="#def3015"><span class="bold"><span class="italic">Usher syndrome</span></span></a> <span class="italic">(Hallgren B 1959 Retinitis pigmentosa combined with congenital deafness; with vestibulo-cerebellar ataxia and mental abnormality in a proportion of cases: a clinical and genetico-statistical study. Acta Psychiat Neurol Scand 138:5–101).</span></span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1200"><span class="bold">Harris’s growth lines</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2195">   transverse juxta-epiphyseal lines of long bones seen on X-ray, which represent temporary growth arrest.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2200">   <span class="italic">Henry Harris (1886–1951), Professor of Anatomy, Cambridge, UK.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1205"><span class="bold">Hartmann’s pouch</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2205">   dilation above the neck of the gallbladder – a pathological entity produced by a contained gallstone.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2210">   <span class="italic">Henri Hartmann (1860–1952), Professor of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Paris, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1210"><span class="bold">Hasner’s valve</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2215">   otherwise known as the plica lacrimalis, a fold of mucous membrane that forms an imperfect cover at the lower opening of the nasolacrimal duct into the inferior nasal meatus.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2220">   <span class="italic">Joseph Hasner, Ritter von Artha (1819–1892), Austrian ophthalmologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1215"><span class="bold">Hassall’s corpuscles</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2225">   spherical or ovoid bodies found in the medulla of the thymus, composed of concentric arrays of epithelial cells that contain keratohyalin and bundles of cytoplasmic filaments.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2230">   <span class="italic">Arthur Hill Hassall (1817–1894), English chemist and physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1220"><span class="bold">Haversian: canals</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2235">   central vascular channels in Haversian systems;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1225"><span class="bold">systems</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2240">   cylindrical units of tissue (osteons) in compact bone.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2245">   <span class="italic">Clopton Havers (1817–1894), physician practising first in London, then in the Isle of Wight, UK.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1230"><span class="bold">Hawkins sign</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2250">   subchondral lucency of the talar dome, occurring secondary to subchondral atrophy 6–8weeks after a fracture of the talar neck (Hawkins LG 1970 Fractures of the neck of the talus. J Bone Joint Surg Am 52:991–1002).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1235"><span class="bold">Heidenhain’s trichrome stain</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2255">   a stain for connective tissue.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2260">   <span class="italic">Rudolf Peter Heinrich Heidenhain (1834–1897), Polish physiologist, Breslau.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1240"><span class="bold">Heller’s myotomy, cardiomyotomy</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2265">   a surgical procedure in which the muscles of the cardia (lower oesophageal sphincter) are cut, allowing food and liquids to pass to the stomach; the procedure may be open or closed (laparoscopic) (Heller E 1914 Extramuköse Kardioplastik beim chronischen Kardiospasmus mit Dilatation des Oesophagus. Mitt Grenzgeb Med Chir 27:141–9).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2270">   <span class="italic">Ernest Heller (1877–1964), German surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1245"><span class="bold">Henle’s: accessory paraflocculus of Henle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2275">   the dorsal leaf of the cerebellar flocculus;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1250"><span class="bold">conjunctival crypts of Henle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2280">   infoldings of the conjunctiva;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1255"><span class="bold">fibres</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2285">   the ‘axons’ of foveal retinal cones running parallel to the retinal surface;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1260"><span class="bold">gastrocolic trunk of Henle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2290">   the confluence of the right superior colic and right superior gastroepiploic veins, draining into the superior mesenteric vein at the inferior border of the neck of the pancreas;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1265"><span class="bold">layer</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2295">   the outer layer of cells in the root sheath of a hair;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1270"><span class="bold">loop of Henle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2300">   the looped portion of the renal tubule.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2305">   <span class="italic">Friedrich Gustav Henle (1808–1885), Professor of Anatomy in Zurich, Switzerland, then Heidelberg and Göttingen, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1275"><span class="bold">Henry: anterior approach of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2310">   an approach that provides exposure to the volar aspect of the radial shaft;<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E154" id="pagebreak_1.464E154"/><a id="pg1464e.152"/></span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1280"><span class="bold">knot of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2315">   the crossing of the tendon of flexor hallucis longus deep to the tendon of flexor digitorum longus in the sole of the foot;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1285"><span class="bold">mobile wad of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2320">   three muscles, brachioradialis, extensor carpi radialis longus and extensor carpi radialis brevis, that are palpable below the lateral epicondyle of the humerus, lying on the lateral aspect of the radius.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2325">   <span class="italic">Arnold Kirkpatrick Henry (1886–1962), Professor of Anatomy, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1290"><span class="bold"><span class="italic">Hensen’s: cells, stripe</span></span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2330">   in the <a href="#p1140"><span class="bold">organ of Corti</span></a> <span class="italic">(see above)</span> to the outer side of the <a href="#p1280"><span class="bold">cells of Deiters</span></a> <span class="italic">(see above)</span>;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1295"><span class="bold">node</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2335">   thickening at the site of the first formation of the primitive streak.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2340">   <span class="italic">Viktor Hensen (1834–1924), Professor of Physiology, Kiel, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1300"><span class="bold">Hering–Breuer reflex</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2345">   a lung stretch reflex mediated by the vagus.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2350">   <span class="italic">Carl Ewald Hering (1834–1918), physiologist, Academy of Military Medicine, Vienna, Austria, and then Leipzig, Germany; Josef Breuer (1842–1925), psychiatrist and physiologist, Vienna, Austria, where he collaborated with Hering.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1305"><span class="bold">Hering, canals of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2355">   fine terminal ductules lined by cuboidal epithelium, linking the intralobular bile canaliculi with bile ducts in the portal canals.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2360">   <span class="italic">Carl Ewald Hering (see above).</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1310"><span class="bold">Heschl: sulcus of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2365">   the anterior border of the planum temporale;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1315"><span class="bold">Heschl’s transverse temporal gyri</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2370">   gyri on the temporal lobe of the brain.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2375">   <span class="italic">Richard Heschl (1824–1881), Professor of Pathology, Cracow, Poland, then Professor of Clinical Medicine, Graz, Austria.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1320"><span class="bold">Hesselbach’s: fascia</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2380">   the cribriform fascia;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1325"><span class="bold">ligament</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2385">   the interfoveolar ligament;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1330"><span class="bold">triangle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2390">   the inguinal triangle.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2395">   <span class="italic">Franz Kaspar Hesselbach (1759–1816), German surgeon and anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1335"><span class="bold">Heubner’s artery</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2400">   the artery that supplies the anteromedial part of the head of the caudate nucleus and the anteroinferior internal capsule.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2405">   <span class="italic">Johann Otto Leonhard Heubner (1843–1926), German paediatrician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1340"><span class="bold">Heuser’s membrane</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2410">   the parietal hypoblast layer.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2415">   <span class="italic">Chester Heuser (1885–1965), American embryologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1345"><span class="bold">Hill–Sachs lesion</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2420">   cortical depression of the posterolateral head of the humerus related to impaction of the humeral head with the inferior glenoid fossa in anterior shoulder dislocation.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2425">   <span class="italic">Harold Arthur Hill (1901–1973), American radiologist; Maurice David Sachs (1909–1987), American radiologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1350"><span class="bold">Hilton’s law</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2430">   nerves crossing a joint supply the joint, the muscles acting on the joint and the skin overlying the joint.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2435">   <span class="italic">John Hilton (1805–1878), surgeon, Guy’s Hospital, London, UK.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1355"><span class="bold">Hirschsprung’s disease</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2440">   megacolon resulting from congenital absence of autonomic ganglion cells in the distal contracted segment.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2445">   <span class="italic">Harald Hirschsprung (1830–1916), physician, Queen Louise Children’s Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1360"><span class="bold">His: angle of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2450">   the normally acute angle between the abdominal oesophagus and the fundus of the stomach at the oesophagogastric junction;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1365"><span class="bold">bundle of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2455">   the atrioventricular bundle of the heart;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1370"><span class="bold">furcula of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2460">   an inverted U that appears in the central wall of the developing pharynx;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1375"><span class="bold">sinus of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2465">   the caudal portion of the second branchial arch, as well as the third and fourth arches, which becomes submerged in the cervical sinus of His, a shallow ectodermal pit.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2470">   <span class="italic">Wilhelm His (Junior) (1863–1934), Professor of Anatomy successively at Leipzig, Germany; Basle, Switzerland; and Göttingen and Berlin, Germany. Son of Wilhelm His (Senior).</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1380"><span class="bold">Hitselberger’s sign</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2475">   loss of sensation in the posterosuperior part of the external acoustic meatus (external auditory canal) that may be an early sign of an acoustic tumour.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2480">   <span class="italic">William E Hitselberger (1930–2014), American neurosurgeon, a pioneer in developing the auditory brainstem implant.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1385"><span class="bold">Hjortsjö’s crook</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2485">   in the biliary tract, the right posterior sectional duct normally hooks over the origin of the right anterior sectional portal vein, forming ‘Hjortsjö’s crook’ (Hjortsjö CH 1951 The topography of the intrahepatic duct system. Acta Anat (Basel) 11:599–615).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1390"><span class="bold">Hoboken, valves of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2490">   constrictions of the contours of the umbilical arteries along their course through the umbilical cord.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2495">   <span class="italic">Nicolas van Hoboken (1632–1678), Professor of Anatomy, Harderwyk, then Professor of Medicine and Mathematics, Steinfurt, Netherlands.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1395"><span class="bold">Hodgkin’s lymphoma</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2500">   a haematopoietic neoplasm characterized by cancerous Hodgkin and Reed–Sternberg cells (HRS cells) in an inflammatory background. The aetiology of the disease is not well understood.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2505">   <span class="italic">Thomas Hodgkin (1798–1866), English physician and pathologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1400"><span class="bold">Hofbauer cells</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2510">   placental macrophages in the chorionic villi.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2515">   <span class="italic">J Isfred Hofbauer (1878–1961), American gynaecologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1405"><span class="bold">Holden, line of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2520">   the transverse skin crease at the groin caused by flexion of the hip.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2525">   <span class="italic">Luther Holden (1815–1905), surgeon, St Bartholomew’s Hospital, London, UK.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1410"><span class="bold">Holmes tremor</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2530">   a tremor that is usually slow and large in amplitude, and may be present at rest, with movement, and often with sustained posture.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2535">   <span class="italic">Gordon Morgan Holmes (1876–1965), British neurologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1415"><span class="bold">Holmes–Adie syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2540">   a disorder characterized by one eye with a pupil that is larger than normal and constricts slowly in bright light (tonic pupil), and absence of deep tendon reflexes, usually in the Achilles tendon.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2545">   <span class="italic">Gordon Morgan Holmes (1876–1965), Irish neurologist; William John Adie (1886–1935), British physician and neurologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1420"><span class="bold">Hopkinson squeeze test</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2550">   a test to assess the inferior tibiofibular joint, by compressing the fibula to the tibia at the midpoint of the leg: an injured syndesmosis will result in pain felt in the area of the inferior tibiofibular joint (Hopkinson WJ, St Pierre P, Ryan JB et al 1990 Syndesmosis sprains of the ankle. Foot Ankle 10:325–30).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1425"><span class="bold">Horner’s syndrome, Bernard–Horner syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2555">   ptosis and pupillary constriction following interruption of the sympathetic supply to the eyelid and pupil, respectively (hemifacial anhidrosis may also occur).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2560">   <span class="italic">Johann Horner (1831–1886), Professor of Ophthalmology, Zurich, Switzerland; Claude Bernard (1813–1878), French physiologist, considered one of the founders of experimental medicine.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1430"><span class="bold">Hotchkiss approach</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2565">   anteromedial ‘over the top’ surgical approach to the elbow performed between flexor carpi ulnaris and flexor carpi radialis (or palmaris longus, when present); it provides good access to the tip of the coronoid process and the whole anterior elbow joint (Hotchkiss R 1998 Surgical technique. In: Hotchkiss R (ed) Compass Universal Hinge. Surgical Technique. Memphis: Smith &amp; Nephew, 8–12).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2570">   <span class="italic">Robert N Hotchkiss, American orthopaedic surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1435"><span class="bold">Houston, valves of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2575">   three intraluminal folds in the wall of the rectum.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2580">   <span class="italic">John Houston (1802–1845), Irish surgeon and anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1440"><span class="bold">Howship’s lacunae</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2585">   absorption spaces in bone.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2590">   <span class="italic">John Howship (1781–1841), surgeon, St George’s and Charing Cross Hospitals, London, UK. Suffered from osteomyelitis of the tibia and made a special study of bone pathology.</span></div><div class="para_indented" id="p2595">   <span class="italic">Howship–Romberg sign:</span></div><div class="para_indented" id="p2600">   <span class="italic">see</span> <span class="italic"><span class="bold">Romberg sign.</span></span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1445"><span class="bold">Humphrey, ligament of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2605">   meniscofemoral ligament – Humphrey described this ligament as running from the lateral meniscus to the posterior cruciate ligament.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2610">   <span class="italic">George Murray Humphrey (1820–1896), Professor of Anatomy and then of Surgery, Cambridge, UK. Founder of Journal of Anatomy.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1450"><span class="bold">Hunter’s canal</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2615">   the subsartorial canal.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2620">   <span class="italic">John Hunter (1728–1793), surgeon, St George’s Hospital, London, UK. Described ligation of the femoral artery in the subsartorial canal for popliteal aneurysm. John Hunter is often described as the Founder of Scientific Surgery.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1455"><span class="bold">Huntington’s disease, chorea</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2625">   an autosomal dominant disease characterized by chronic progressive chorea and mental deterioration.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2630">   <span class="italic">George Sumner Huntington (1850–1916), American physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1460"><span class="bold">Hurler’s syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2635">   a genetic disorder resulting in a deficiency in breakdown of mucopolysaccharides in the extracellular matrix.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2640">   <span class="italic">Gertrud Hurler (1889–1965), German paediatrician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1465"><span class="bold">Huschke: foramen of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2645">   otherwise known as the foramen tympanicum. An uncommon developmental defect in the anteroinferior aspect of the bony external acoustic meatus. which usually closes by the fifth year but may persist throughout life;<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E155" id="pagebreak_1.464E155"/><a id="pg1464e.153"/></span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1470"><span class="bold">inferior longitudinal sulcus of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2650">   (synonym: collateral sulcus) a structure that separates the fusiform gyrus from the parahippocampal gyrus of the limbic lobe.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2655">   <span class="italic">Emil Huschke (1797–1858), German anatomist and embryologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1475"><span class="bold">Hutchinson’s incisors</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2660">   pegged lateral incisors and notched central incisors, seen in congenital syphilis.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2665">   <span class="italic">Sir Jonathan Hutchinson (1828–1913), British surgeon, pathologist, pioneer in the study of congenital syphilis.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1480"><span class="bold">Huxley’s layer</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2670">   the inner layer of cells of the root sheath of a hair.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2675">   <span class="italic">Thomas Henry Huxley (1825–1895), lecturer in Natural History, Royal School of Mines, UK. An early supporter of Darwinism.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1485"><span class="bold">Hyrtl’s anastomosis</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2680">   an occasional anastomosis between umbilical arteries in the placenta.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2685">   <span class="italic">Joseph Hyrtl (1811–1894), Austrian anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1490"><span class="bold">Jackson’s membrane</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2690">   a peritoneal fold between the caecum or ascending colon and the lateral abdominal wall.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2695">   <span class="italic">Jabez North Jackson (1868–1935), Professor of Anatomy and Surgery, Kansas City, USA.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1495"><span class="bold"><span class="italic">Jacobson’s organ</span></span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2700">   otherwise known as the vomeronasal organ. A bilateral structure in the anteroinferior wall of the nasal septum just dorsal to the paraseptal cartilages, presumed to be analogous to the vomeronasal organ of other vertebrates: function in humans not yet established, but might be involved in the detection of pheromones.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2705">   <span class="italic">Ludwig Lewin Jacobson (1783–1843), Danish surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1500"><span class="bold"><span class="italic">Jacoby, border tissue of</span></span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2710">   a posterior extension of astrocytes from the intermediary tissue of Kuhnt, located internal to the border tissue of Elschnig at the optic nerve head (Jacoby E 1905 Über die Neuroglia des Sehnerven. Klin Mbl Augenheilk 43:129–37).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1505"><span class="bold">Jadassohn–Lewandowsky syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2715">   an autosomal dominant skin disorder characterized predominantly by thickened nails, palmoplantar hyperkeratosis, keratosis pilaris, hyperkeratotic follicular papules on the sites of friction, hair abnormalities and hyperhidrosis of the palms and soles (Jadassohn J, Lewandowsky F 1906 Jacob’s Ikonographia Dermatologica. Berlin: Urban &amp; Schwarzenberg).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1510"><span class="bold">Jensen, intermediate sulcus of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2720">   a downward-projecting side branch of the intraparietal sulcus that descends across the inferior parietal lobule. It starts at the dorsal hemispheric margin and divides the area between the posterior ascending ramus of the Sylvian gyrus and the angular gyrus as it courses ventrally (Jensen J 1870 Die Furchen und Windungen der menschlichen Grosshirn-Hemisphären. Berlin: Georg Reimer).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1515"><span class="bold">Jeune syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2725">   asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy (Jeune M, Carron R, Beraud C et al 1954 Polychondrodystrophie avec blocage thoracique d’évolution fatale. Pediatrie, Lyon 9:390–2).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2730">   <span class="italic">Mathis Jeune (1910–1983), French paediatrician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1520"><span class="bold">Joll’s triangle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2735">   otherwise known as the sternothyrolaryngeal triangle and used to identify the external laryngeal branch of the superior laryngeal nerve during thyroid surgery, the triangle is formed laterally by the upper pole of the thyroid gland and the superior thyroid vessels, superiorly by the attachment of the strap muscles to the thyroid cartilage and medially by the midline.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2740">   <span class="italic">Cecil Augustus Joll (1885–1945), English surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1525"><span class="bold">Joubert’s syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2745">   a ciliopathy, one of a group of rare genetic disorders characterized by decreased muscle tone, difficulties with coordination, abnormal eye movements, abnormal breathing pattern and cognitive impairment (Joubert M, Eisenring JJ, Robb JP et al 1969 Familial agenesis of the cerebellar vermis. A syndrome of episodic hyperpnea, abnormal eye movements, ataxia, and retardation. Neurology 19:813–25).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2750">   <span class="italic">Marie Joubert, paediatric neurologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1530"><span class="bold"><span class="italic">Kager’s fat pad</span></span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2755">   (synonym: pre-Achilles fat pad) a structure located in Kager’s triangle between the Achilles tendon, the superior cortex of the calcaneus and flexor hallucis longus (both muscle and tendon) (Kager H 1939 Zur Klinik und Diagnostik des Achillessehnenrisses. Der Chirurg 11:691–5).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1535"><span class="bold">Kartagener’s syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2760">   a genetic disorder (immotile cilia syndrome) affecting axonemal dynein function.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2765">   <span class="italic">Manes Kartagener (1897–1975), Swiss physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1540"><span class="bold">Kawase’s triangle of the middle fossa</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2770">   an area that lies between the lateral margin of the greater petrosal nerve (medial border), the lateral edge of the trigeminal nerve behind the point where the greater petrosal nerve passes below its lateral surface to the crest of the petrous apex (lateral border), and a line along the connection of the posterior border of the mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve and the trigeminal ganglion (the crest of petrous apex) to the centre of the geniculate ganglion (Kawase T, van Loeren HR, Keller JT et al 1996 Meningeal architecture of the cavernous sinus: clinical and surgical implications. Neurosurg 39:527–36).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1545"><span class="bold">Keen approach</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2775">   Keen categorized zygomatic fractures as those of the arch, the body or the sutural disjunction. He was the first to introduce an intraoral approach to the zygomatic arch, in which an incision is made in the gingivobuccal sulcus (Keen WW 1909 Surgery: Its Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: WB Saunders).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1550"><span class="bold">Kehr’s sign</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2780">   the occurrence of acute pain in the tip of the shoulder due to the presence of blood or other irritants in the peritoneal cavity when an individual is lying down and the legs are elevated. Kehr’s sign in the left shoulder is considered a classic symptom of a ruptured spleen.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2785">   <span class="italic">Johannes Otto Kehr (1862–1916), German surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1555"><span class="bold">Kerckring: valves of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2790">   the plicae circulares;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1560"><span class="bold">Kerckring’s centre</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2795">   an occasional independent centre of ossification in the occipital bone.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2800">   <span class="italic">Theodor Kerckring (1640–1693), Dutch anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1565"><span class="bold">Kienböck’s disease</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2805">   slowly progressing degeneration of the lunate bone of the wrist.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2810">   <span class="italic">Robert Kienböck (1871–1953), Austrian radiologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1570"><span class="bold">Kiesselbach’s plexus</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2815">   a site of haemorrhage on the nasal septum.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2820">   <span class="italic">Wilhelm Kiesselbach (1839–1902), ear, nose and throat surgeon, Erlangen, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1575"><span class="bold">Killian’s: dehiscence</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2825">   a gap between the attachments of the inferior constrictor of the pharynx to the cricoid and thyroid cartilages. Site of origin of a pharyngeal pouch;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1580"><span class="bold">sling</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2830">   the cricopharyngeal sphincter;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1585"><span class="bold">triangle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2835">   a triangular area in the wall of the pharynx between the oblique fibres of the inferior constrictor muscle and the transverse fibres of cricopharyngeus, through which a Zenker’s diverticulum may occur.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2840">   <span class="italic">Gustav Killian (1860–1921), Professor of Laryngorhinology, successively in Freiburg and Berlin, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1590"><span class="bold">Kindler’s syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2845">   congenital poikiloderma with bullae and progressive cutaneous atrophy.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2850">   <span class="italic">Theresa Kindler (1890–1975), Austrian-born dermatologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1595"><span class="bold">Kirk’s arcade</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2855">   an anastomosis between branches of the dorsal pancreatic artery and the right gastro-epiploic artery (Kirk E 1931 Untersuchungen über die gröbere und feinere topographische Verteilung der Arterien, Venen und Ausführungsgänge in der menschlichen Bauchspeicheldrüse. Z Ges Anat 94:822–75).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1600"><span class="bold">Klingler’s method/technique</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2860">   a method of brain fixation and dissection based on freezing and thawing the brain and subsequently peeling away tissues to expose white matter tracts (Agrawal A, Kapfhammer JP, Kress A et al 2011 Josef Klingler’s models of white matter tracts: influences on neuroanatomy, neurosurgery, and neuroimaging. Neurosurgery 69:238–52).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2865">   <span class="italic">Josef Klingler (1888–1963), Swiss neuroanatomical ‘technician’.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1605"><span class="bold">Klippel–Feil syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2870">   congenital fusion or reduction in number of the cervical vertebrae.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2875">   <span class="italic">Maurice Klippel (1858–1942), neurologist, Salpêtrière, Paris, France; André Feil (1884–1955), French neurologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1610"><span class="bold">Klippel–Trenaunay syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2880">   a rare congenital condition where blood vessels and/or lymph vessels fail to form properly.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2885">   <span class="italic">Maurice Klippel (1858–1942), French physician; Paul Trénaunay (1875–?), French neurologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1615"><span class="bold">Klumpke’s paralysis</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2890">   injury to lowest root of brachial plexus (T1).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2895">   <span class="italic">Augusta Déjerine-Klumpke (1859–1927), neurologist, Paris, France. Married to another neurologist, Joseph Déjerine.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1620"><span class="bold">Koch, triangle of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2900">   a triangular area in the wall of the right atrium that marks the site of the atrioventricular node.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2905">   <span class="italic">Walter Karl Koch (1880–1962), physician and pathologist, Berlin and Freiburg, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1625"><span class="bold">Kocher’s manoeuvre, method</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2910">   an invagination method for radical operation for an inguinal hernia.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2915">   <span class="italic">Theodor Kocher (1841–1917), made numerous contributions to surgery. Awarded Nobel Prize in Medicine or Physiology (1909) for his pioneering work on physiology, pathology and surgery of the thyroid gland.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1630"><span class="bold">Köhler’s disease</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2920">   avascular necrosis of the tarsal navicular bone and, less frequently, the patella, possibly due to repetitive compressive forces that cause a loss of blood supply and fragmentation in a <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E156" id="pagebreak_1.464E156"/><a id="pg1464e.154"/>bone that is not fully ossified. More common in males; onset at 3–8years of age. Asymptomatic or painful on the medial side of the foot; tenderness on palpation and swelling over area of navicular bone; slight, usually unilateral, limp.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2925">   <span class="italic">Alban Köhler (1874–1947), German radiologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1635"><span class="bold">Kohn, interalveolar pores of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2930">   pores that link adjacent alveolar air spaces of the lung.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2935">   <span class="italic">Hans Kohn (1866–1935), pathologist, Berlin, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1640"><span class="bold">Kölliker–Fuse nucleus</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2940">   the substantia intermedia centralis in the spinal cord.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2945">   <span class="italic">Rudolf Albert von Kölliker (1817–1905), Swiss anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1645"><span class="bold">Kommerell, diverticulum of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2950">   an aortic diverticulum associated with an aberrant right subclavian artery.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2955">   <span class="italic">Burckhard Friedrich Kommerell (1901–1990), German radiologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1650"><span class="bold">Kooy, dorsal cap of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2960">   a subnucleus of the inferior olive: processes optokinetic information and projects to the contralateral flocculus and nodulus (Kooy FH 1916 The inferior olive in vertebrates. Thesis, Haarlem: Erven Bohn; Kooy FH 1917 The inferior olive in vertebrates. Folia Neurabiol 10:205–369).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1655"><span class="bold">Körner’s septum</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2965">   a dense bony plate in the mastoid process that represents the persistence of the petrosquamous suture line. The septum divides the mastoid process into a superficial squamous portion and a deep petrous portion (Korner O 1926 Das Septum petrosquamosum (mastoideum) und seine klinische Bedeutung. Arch Ohren Nasen Kehlkopfheilk 17:137).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1660"><span class="bold">Korsakoff psychosis, syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2970">   a syndrome of anterograde and retrograde amnesia with confabulation, associated with alcoholic or non-alcoholic polyneuritis, described as ‘cerebropathia psychica toxaemia’ by Korsakoff; currently used synonymously with ‘amnestic syndrome’.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2975">   <span class="italic">Sergei Sergeievich Korsakoff (1854–1900), Russian neuropsychiatrist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1665"><span class="bold">Kraissl’s lines</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2980">   the lines of greatest tension in the skin.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2985">   <span class="italic">Cornelius Kraissl (1902–1999), plastic surgeon, New Jersey, USA.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1670"><span class="bold">Krause, glands of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p2990">   accessory lacrimal glands in the subconjunctival tissue of the upper fornix.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p2995">   <span class="italic">Karl Friedrich Theodor Krause (1797–1868), Professor of Anatomy, Hanover, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1675"><span class="bold">Krebs’ cycle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3000">   the citric acid cycle – the oxidative energy production pathway in mitochondria.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3005">   <span class="italic">Sir Hans Adolf Krebs (1900–1981), German-born British biochemist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1680"><span class="bold"><span class="italic">Kugel’s anastomotic artery</span></span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3010">   the arteria anastomotica auricularis magna (synonym: atrial anastomotic branch of circumflex branch of left coronary artery) (Kugel MA 1927 Anatomical studies on the coronary arteries and their branches. I. Arteria anastomotica auricularis magna. Am Heart J 3:260–70).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1685"><span class="bold">Kuhn classification</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3015">   a classification of frontal ethmoidal cells into types 1 to 4 (Kuhn FA 1996 Chronic frontal sinusitis: the endoscopic frontal recess approach. Oper Techn Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 7:222–9).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1690"><span class="bold">Kuhnt: central tissue meniscus of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3020">   a thickening of the astroglial membrane (of Elschnig) covering the optic nerve head at the centre of the disc;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1695"><span class="bold">intermediary layer of, intermediary tissue of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3025">   a collar of astrocytes that separates the optic nerve head from the retina.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3030">   <span class="italic">Hermann Kuhnt (1850–1925), German ophthalmologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1700"><span class="bold">Kulchitsky cells</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3035">   neuroendocrine cells in the lung and gut.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3040">   <span class="italic">Nicholas Kulchitsky (1856–1925), Professor of Histology, Kharkov, Russia. After the Russian Revolution, went to London, UK, to continue his work in neuropathology at University College.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1705"><span class="bold">Kuntz, nerve of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3045">   an inconstant intrathoracic ramus that joins the second intercostal nerve to the ventral ramus of the first thoracic nerve, proximal to the point where the latter gives a branch to the brachial plexus.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3050">   <span class="italic">Albert Kuntz (1879–1957), American anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1710"><span class="bold">Kupffer cells</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3055">   resident liver macrophages.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3060">   <span class="italic">Karl Wilhelm von Kupffer (1829–1902), Professor of Anatomy successively at Kiel, Königsberg and Munich, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1715"><span class="bold">Labbé, inferior anastomotic vein of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3065">   a vein that connects the superficial middle cerebral vein to the transverse sinus.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3070">   <span class="italic">Léon Labbé (1832–1916), French surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1720"><span class="bold">Ladd’s bands</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3075">   congenital bands across the duodenum in volvulus neonatorum.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3080">   <span class="italic">William Edward Ladd (1880–1967), surgeon, Boston Children’s Hospital, USA.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1725"><span class="bold">Laimer’s: diverticulum</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3085">   a pulsion diverticulum located below cricopharyngeus;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1730"><span class="bold"><span class="italic">triangle</span></span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3090">   <span class="italic">see</span> <span class="italic"><span class="bold">Killian’s triangle.</span></span></span><div class="para_indented" id="p3095">   <span class="italic">Eduard Laimer (1857–1934), anatomist, Graz, Austria.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1735"><span class="bold">Lancisi, muscle of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3100">   the main medial papillary muscle of the right ventricle (quoted in: Tandler J 1913 Anatomie des Herzens. In: Bardeleben’s Handbuch der Anatomie des Menschen. Jena: Gustav Fischer).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3105">   <span class="italic">Giovanni Maria Lancisi (1654–1720), Italian physician, epidemiologist and anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1740"><span class="bold">Landsmeer’s ligaments</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3110">   the transverse and oblique retinacular ligaments of the fingers.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3115">   <span class="italic">Johan Landsmeer (1919–1999), Professor of Anatomy, Leiden, Netherlands.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1745"><span class="bold">Langer’s lines</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3120">   cleavage or crease lines in the skin produced by the arrangement of the subcutaneous fibrous tissues.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3125">   <span class="italic">Karl Ritter von Edenberg Langer (1819–1887), Professor of Anatomy, Hungary, and then Vienna, Austria.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1750"><span class="bold">Langerhans: cells</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3130">   dendritic cell of haemopoietic origin, in the epidermis and other epithelia;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1755"><span class="bold">islets of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3135">   clumps of insulin- and other hormone-secreting cells of the pancreas.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3140">   <span class="italic">Paul Langerhans (1847–1888), Professor of Pathology, Freiburg, Germany. Described the islet cells in his doctoral thesis in 1869, at the age of 22.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1760"><span class="bold">Langhans cells</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3145">   cells of the villous cytotrophoblast.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3150">   <span class="italic">Theodor Langhans (1839–1915), pathologist, Berne, Switzerland.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1765"><span class="bold">Laplace’s equation</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3155">   the prototypical elliptic partial differential equation.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3160">   <span class="italic">Pierre-Simon Laplace (1749–1827), French mathematician and astronomer.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1770"><span class="bold">Ledderhose’s disease</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3165">   plantar fascial fibromatosis.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3170">   <span class="italic">Georg Ledderhose (1855–1925), German surgeon. Discovered glucosamine while working on cartilage with Ernst Felix Immanuel Hoppe-Seyler (1825–1895) in Strasbourg, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1775"><span class="bold">Le Fort I, II and III fractures</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3175">   a system of classification of facial fractures.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3180">   <span class="italic">René Le Fort (1869–1951), surgeon, Lille, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1780"><span class="bold">Legueu and Juvara, vertical septa of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3185">   vertical septa that pass from the transverse fibres of the palmar aponeurosis to the underlying deep transverse metacarpal ligament, forming fibro-osseous compartments (Legueu F, Juvara E 1892 Des aponévroses de la paume de la main. Bull Soc Anat Paris 6:383–400).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1785"><span class="bold">Leydig cells</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3190">   the interstitial testosterone-secreting cells of the testis.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3195">   <span class="italic">Franz von Leydig (1821–1908), Professor of Histology successively at Würzburg, Tübingen and Bonn, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1790"><span class="bold">Lieberkühn, crypts of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3200">   tubular glands of the small intestine.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3205">   <span class="italic">Johann Nathaniel Lieberkühn (1711–1756), physician and anatomist, Berlin, Germany. These glands were described in 1688 by Marcello Malpighi (1628–1694), Italian physician and biologist, often cited as ‘the father of microscopical anatomy and histology’.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1795"><span class="bold">Li Fraumeni syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3210">   a rare autosomal dominant cancer predisposition syndrome first reported in 1969 by Frederick Li and Joseph Fraumeni from the National Cancer Institute, Rockville, Maryland, USA (Li FP, Fraumeni JF Jr, Mulvihill JJ et al 1988 A cancer family syndrome in twenty-four kindreds. Cancer Res 48:5358–62).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1800"><span class="bold">Liliequist’s membrane</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3215">   an arachnoid membrane passing from the dorsum sellae to the anterior edge of the mammillary body. Described by Key and Retzius in 1875 and ‘rediscovered’ in 1956 in Liliequist’s cadaveric pneumoencephalographic studies. (Liliequist B 1956 The anatomy of the subarachnoid cisterns. Acta Radiol 46:61–71).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1805"><span class="bold">Lisfranc</span>: <span class="bold">joint</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3220">   the tarsometatarsal joint;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1810"><span class="bold">Lisfranc’s ligament</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3225">   an interosseous ligament between the second metatarsal and first cuneiform bone of the foot.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3230">   <span class="italic">Jacques de St Martin Lisfranc (1790–1847), Professor of Surgery, Paris, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1815"><span class="bold">Lissauer, fasciculus of, tract of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3235">   the ascending tract in the spinal cord.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3240">   <span class="italic">Heinrich Lissauer (1861–1891), neurologist, Breslau, Poland.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1820"><span class="bold">Lister’s tubercle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3245">   a prominence on the posterior surface of the distal radius, ulnar to the groove for the tendon of extensor pollicis longus.<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E157" id="pagebreak_1.464E157"/><a id="pg1464e.155"/></span><div class="para_indented" id="p3250">   <span class="italic">Lord Joseph Lister (1827–1912), successively Professor of Surgery at Glasgow, Edinburgh and King’s College, London, UK.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1825"><span class="bold">Little’s area</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3255">   a site of haemorrhage on the nasal septum.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3260">   <span class="italic">James Laurence Little (1836–1885), Professor of Surgery, University of Vermont, USA.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1830"><span class="bold">Littre, glands of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3265">   small mucous glands of the male urethra.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3270">   <span class="italic">Alexis Littre (1658–1726), French anatomist and surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1835"><span class="bold">Lockwood, suspensory ligament of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3275">   the thickened area of contact between Tenon’s capsule and the sheaths of inferior rectus and inferior oblique in the orbit.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3280">   <span class="italic">Charles Barrett Lockwood (1856–1914), British surgeon and anatomist, St Bartholomew’s Hospital, London, UK.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1840"><span class="bold">Louis, angle of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3285">   the sternal angle – the angle formed on the anterior surface of the sternum at the junction of its body and manubrium.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3290">   <span class="italic">Antoine Louis (1723–1792), Maître de Chirurgie and later Professor of Physiology, Royal College of Surgeons, Paris, France. He designed the prototype of the guillotine, which was originally nicknamed the ‘Louison’ or ‘Louisette’.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1845"><span class="bold">Lower, intervenous tubercle of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3295">   a structure that lies between the fossa ovalis and the superior vena cava. <span class="italic">Richard Lower (1631–1691), English physician</span>. (Lower R 1669 Tractatus de corde. Item de motu, colore sanguinis et chyli in eum transitum. London: J Redmayne &amp; J Allestry, <a href="../B978070207705000001X/B978070207705000001X.xhtml#pagebreak_22">p. 22</a>).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1850"><span class="bold">Ludwig’s angina</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3300">   a potentially life-threatening, rapidly expanding, diffuse inflammation of the submandibular and sublingual spaces, occurring most often in young adults with dental infections.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3305">   <span class="italic">Wilhelm Friedrich von Ludwig (1790–1865), German surgeon and obstetrician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1855"><span class="bold">Lugaro cell</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3310">   an inhibitory interneurone in the cerebellum.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3315">   <span class="italic">Ernesto Lugaro (1870–1940), Italian neuropsychiatrist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1860"><span class="bold">Luschka: bursa of (lateral Luschka aperture)</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3320">   an accessory pharyngeal recess in front of the anterior arch of the atlas;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1865"><span class="bold">duct of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3325">   small, gland-like tubular structures in the wall of the gallbladder adjacent to the liver, especially in the part covered with peritoneum;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1870"><span class="bold">foramen of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3330">   the lateral aperture in the roof of the fourth cerebral ventricle;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1875"><span class="bold">uncovertebral joints of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3335">   small synovial joints on either side of the intervertebral cartilaginous joint in cervical vertebrae C3–C7 (between the uncinate process of the inferior vertebral body and the bevelled lateral border of the superior body at each level).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3340">   <span class="italic">Hubert Luschka (1820–1875), Professor of Anatomy, Tübingen, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1880"><span class="bold">McBurney’s point</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3345">   the reputed site of maximal tenderness in appendicitis.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3350">   <span class="italic">Charles McBurney (1845–1913), American surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1885"><span class="bold">Macewen’s triangle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3355">   the surface marking of the mastoid antrum.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3360">   <span class="italic">Sir William Macewen (1848–1924), Scottish surgeon. Established the treatment of intracranial complications of middle ear suppuration.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1890"><span class="bold">McGregor’s patch</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3365">   an area of fibrous attachment between the anterior edge of the parotid fascia and the dermis of the skin of the cheek (Rossell-Perry P 2013 The zygomatic ligament of the face: a critical review. OA Anat 1:3).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3370">   <span class="italic">McLaughlin lesion:</span></div><div class="para_indented" id="p3375">   reverse <span class="italic"><span class="bold">Hill–Sachs lesion</span></span> – an impaction fracture of the anteromedial aspect of the humeral head following posterior dislocation of the humerus.</div><div class="para_indented" id="p3380">   <span class="italic">Harrison Lloyd McLaughlin (1906–1970), American orthopaedic surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1895"><span class="bold">Mackenrodt, ligament of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3385">   the transverse cervical (or cardinal) ligament of the uterus.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3390">   <span class="italic">Alwin Mackenrodt (1859–1925), Professor of Gynaecology, Berlin, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1900"><span class="bold">McKenzie branch of first cervical nerve</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3395">   a communicating branch between the (spinal) accessory nerve and the anterior root of the first cervical nerve (McKenzie KG 1955 The surgical treatment of spasmodic torticollis. Clin Neurosurg 2:37–43).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1905"><span class="bold">Magendie, foramen of</span>, <span class="bold">aperture of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3400">   the median aperture in the roof of the fourth ventricle.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3405">   <span class="italic">François Magendie (1783–1855), physician to the Hôtel Dieu, Paris, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1910"><span class="bold">Malassez, rests of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3410">   epithelial remnants of the enamel organ found in the periodontal ligament.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3415">   <span class="italic">Louis Charles Malassez (1842–1909), French surgeon and physiologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1915"><span class="bold">Mallory’s triple stain</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3420">   Mallory’s acid fuchsin, orange G and aniline blue stain for connective tissue.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3425">   <span class="italic">Frank Burr Mallory (1862–1941), pathologist, Boston, USA.</span></div><div class="para_indented" id="p3430">   <span class="bold">Marfan: aortic dissection –</span></div><div class="para_indented" id="p3435">   <span class="italic">see below;</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1920"><span class="bold">syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3440">   an autosomal genetic disorder of the connective tissue characterized by a long body and extended limbs and fingers, often associated with cardiovascular abnormalities such as dissecting aortic aneurysms and valve defects, as well as subluxated ocular lenses.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3445">   <span class="italic">Antoine Bernard-Jean Marfan (1858–1942), Professor of Infantile Hygiene, Paediatric Clinic, University of Paris, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1925"><span class="bold">Marshall, vein of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3450">   the left atrial oblique vein, an embryonic remnant of the left superior caval vein which is enclosed within the Marshall ligament (Marshall J 1850 On the development of the great anterior veins in man and mammalia: including an account of certain remnants of fetal structure found in the adult, a comparative view of these great veins in the different mammalia, and an analysis of their occasional peculiarities in the human subject. Philos Trans R Soc Lond 140:133–69).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3455">   <span class="italic">John Marshall (1818–1891), English surgeon and anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1930"><span class="bold"><span class="italic">Martin–Gruber anastomosis</span></span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3460">   an anomalous connection between the median and ulnar nerves in the forearm (Martin R 1763 Om nervernas allmänna egenskaper i menniskans kropp jemte nervernas särskilda anatomiska beskrifning. Stockholm: Lars Silvius. Gruber W 1870 Über die Verbindung des Nervus medianus mit dem Nervus ulnaris am Unterarme des Menschen und der Säugethiere. Archiv für pathologische Anatomie und Physiologie und für klinische Medizin 37:501–22); <span class="italic">see</span> <a href="#def1140"><span class="bold">Gruber</span></a> <span class="italic">above</span>.</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1935"><span class="bold">Martinotti cell, neurone</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3465">   a fusiform neurone in the deepest layer of the cerebral cortex.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3470">   <span class="italic">Giovanni Martinotti (1857–1928), pathologist, Bologna, Italy.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1940"><span class="bold"><span class="italic">Martius fat pad flap</span></span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3475">   a procedure used for complex fistula repair and as an interposition graft with vaginal reconstructive surgery (Martius H 1928 Die operative Wiederherstellung der vollkommen fehlenden Harnrohre und des Schlessmuskels derselben. Zentralbi Gynakol 52:480–6).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1945"><span class="bold">Masson’s trichrome stain</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3480">   a stain for connective tissue.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3485">   <span class="italic">Claude Laurent Pierre Masson (1880–1959), French-born Canadian pathologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1950"><span class="bold">Mattox manoeuvre</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3490">   a left medial visceral rotation – a surgical step to explore and handle Zone 1 and 2 retroperitoneal injuries (aorta, left iliac and pelvic vessels).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3495">   <span class="italic">Kenneth L Mattox (1938– ) American surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1955"><span class="bold">Maubrac, ansa of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3500">   an obsolete term for an anastomosis between the lateral deep branches of the cervical plexus and the accessory nerve (Maubrac G 1883 Recherches anatomiques et physiologiques sur le nerf SCM. Thesis, Bordeaux University (no. 38)).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1960"><span class="bold">Mayer–Rokitansky–Küster–Hauser syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3505">   a syndrome characterized by congenital absence of the vagina, primary amenorrhoea, rudimentary cornua uteri and morphologically normal ovaries and Fallopian tubes situated on the side wall of the pelvis.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3510">   <span class="italic">August Franz Joseph Karl Mayer (1787–1865), German anatomist and physiologist; Karl Freiherr von Rokitansky (1804–1878), Austrian pathologist; Hermann Küster (1879–1964), German gynaecologist; Georges André Hauser (1921–2009), Swiss gynaecologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1965"><span class="bold">Mayo, prepyloric vein of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3515">   a tributary of the right gastric vein that passes anterior to the pylorus at the gastroduodenal junction, also called vena prepylorica [TA], and Latarget’s vein.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3520">   <span class="italic">William James Mayo (1861–1939), American physician and surgeon, one of the founders of the Mayo Clinic.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1970"><span class="bold">Meckel’s: cartilage</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3525">   the cartilage of the first branchial arch;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1975"><span class="bold">cave</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3530">   a cerebrospinal fluid-containing arachnoidal pouch protruding from the posterior cranial fossa. Located near the apex of the petrous part of the temporal bone, it houses the trigeminal ganglion and extends forwards, rather like an open-ended, three-fingered glove, enveloping the rootlets of the trigeminal nerve, the trigeminal ganglion and the ophthalmic, maxillary and mandibular divisions of the trigeminal nerve;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1980"><span class="bold">diverticulum</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3535">   the remains of the vitellointestinal duct.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3540">   <span class="italic">Johann Meckel (1781–1833), Professor of Anatomy, Halle, Germany. His grandfather was Professor of Anatomy in Berlin and described the pterygopalatine ganglion and the dural sac, which contains the ganglion of the trigeminal nerve. His father was also Professor of Anatomy in Halle.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1985"><span class="bold">Meibomian glands</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3545">   the tarsal glands of the eyelid. If blocked, they become distended into Meibomian cysts.<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E158" id="pagebreak_1.464E158"/><a id="pg1464e.156"/></span><div class="para_indented" id="p3550">   <span class="italic">Heinrich Meibom (1638–1700), Professor of Medicine, History and Poetry, Helmstadt, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1990"><span class="bold">Meissner’s: corpuscles</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3555">   tactile nerve endings in skin;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def1995"><span class="bold">plexus</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3560">   the submucosal autonomic plexus of the intestine.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3565">   <span class="italic">George Meissner (1829–1905), Professor of Anatomy and Physiology, Basle, Switzerland; Zoology and Physiology, Freiburg, Germany; and Physiology, Göttingen, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2000"><span class="bold">Mendel’s laws</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3570">   the laws of inheritance of single-gene traits that form the basis of the science of genetics, first described by Gregor Mendel in 1865.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3575">   <span class="italic">Gregor Johann Mendel (1822–1884), abbot and pioneer of genetics from Brno, Czech Republic.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2005"><span class="bold">Ménière’s disease</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3580">   aural or auditory vertigo.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3585">   <span class="italic">Prosper Ménière (1799–1862), French otorhinolaryngologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2010"><span class="bold">Mercier’s bar</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3590">   a curved fold of mucous membrane extending across the bladder between the two ureteric orifices, produced by a transverse bundle of muscle fibres.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3595">   <span class="italic">Louis Auguste Mercier (1811–1882), French urologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2015"><span class="bold">Merkel: cells, corpuscles</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3600">   sensory cells in the skin;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2020"><span class="bold">disc</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3605">   a slowly adapting type I receptor, which lies in the basal epidermis of glabrous skin and is sensitive to sustained pressure.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3610">   <span class="italic">Friedrich Sigmund Merkel (1845–1919), Professor of Anatomy successively at Rostock, then Göttingen, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2035"><span class="bold">Meyer’s loop</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3630">   the fibres of the geniculocalcarine tract that loop forwards in the temporal lobe.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3635">   <span class="italic">Adolf Meyer (1866–1950), American psychiatrist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2040"><span class="bold">Meynert, basal nucleus of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3640">   part of the ‘substantia innominata’ of the basal forebrain; contains large cholinergic neurones that project to the cerebral cortex, amygdala and thalamus.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3645">   <span class="italic">Theodore Herman Meynert (1833–1892), Professor of Neurology, Vienna, Austria.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2045"><span class="bold">Mikulicz angle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3650">   the angle formed between the head and neck of the femur and its shaft.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3655">   <span class="italic">Johann (Jan) Freiherr von Mikulicz-Radecki (1850–1905), Polish surgeon in Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2050"><span class="bold">Minor’s syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3660">   dehiscence of the roof of the superior semicircular canal (Minor LB 2000 Superior canal dehiscence syndrome. Am J Otol 21:9–19).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2055"><span class="bold">Mirizzi syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3665">   partial obstruction to the flow of bile and the appearance of mild jaundice as a result of biliary stones.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3670">   <span class="italic">Pablo Mirizzi (1893–1964), Argentinian physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2060"><span class="bold">Moll, glands of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3675">   modified sweat glands associated with the eyelashes.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3680">   <span class="italic">Jacob Antonius Moll (1832–1914), ophthalmologist, The Hague, Netherlands.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2065"><span class="bold">Monro, foramen of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3685">   the foramen between the lateral and third ventricles of the brain.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3690">   <span class="italic">Alexander Monro (1733–1817), Professor of Anatomy, Edinburgh, UK. The chair was also held by his father and his son – both also named Alexander.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2070"><span class="bold">Monteggia injury</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3695">   a fracture of the upper portion of the ulna combined with dislocation of the radial head.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3700">   <span class="italic">Giovanni Battista Monteggia (1762–1815), Italian physician and surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2075"><span class="bold"><span class="italic">Montgomery, glands of, tubercles of</span></span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3705">   sebaceous glands situated in the areola of the breast (previously described by Morgagni; <span class="italic">see below</span>).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3710">   <span class="italic">William Montgomery (1797–1859), Professor of Midwifery, Dublin, Ireland.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2080"><span class="bold">Morgagni: columns of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3715">   the columns of the anal canal;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2085"><span class="bold">concha</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3720">   otherwise known as concha nasalis suprema, superior nasal choncha;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2090"><span class="bold">hernia</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3725">   a congenital diaphragmatic hernia between the sternal and costal attachments of the diaphragm;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2095"><span class="bold">hydatid of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3730">   (synonyms: appendix testis, appendices vesiculosae epoophori) a cyst-like remnant of the Müllerian duct attached to a testis;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2100"><span class="bold">sinus</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3735">   a sinus that lies between the superior pharyngeal constrictor and the base of the skull. Internally it is covered by mucosa and posteriorly by the pharyngobasilar fascia and is a route for the spread of neoplasms and infection from the nasopharynx to the base of the skull;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2105"><span class="bold">triangle(s) of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3740">   the right and left sternocostal triangles of Morgagni are openings in the anterior part of the respiratory diaphragmatic muscle, between the sternal and costal parts;</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3745">   <span class="italic">Morgagni’s tubercle – otherwise known as the tuberculum septi nasi or the septal tubercle, it is a focal bulge of the anterior nasal septum at the level of the middle turbinate.</span></div><div class="para_indented" id="p3750">   <span class="italic">Giovanni Battista Morgagni (1682–1771), Professor of Anatomy, Padua, Italy, for 59 years. Described as the founder of modern morbid anatomy.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2110"><span class="bold">Morgenstern, ‘criminal’ fold of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3755">   a constant peritoneal fold attached to the lower pole of the spleen near to the splenic flexure but distinct from the splenocolic ligament. It is most commonly responsible for iatrogenic injuries to the lower pole of the spleen during operation on the left upper quadrant.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3760">   <span class="italic">Leon Morgenstern (1919–2012), American surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2115">Morison, hepatorenal pouch of</span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3765">   the right subhepatic space.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3770">   <span class="italic">James Rutherford Morison (1853–1939), Professor of Surgery, Durham, UK.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2120"><span class="bold">Moro reflex</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3775">   the startle reflex.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3780">   <span class="italic">Ernst Moro (1874–1951), German physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2125"><span class="bold">Morquio syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3785">   mucopolysaccharidosis type IV (MPS IV), an autosomal recessive disorder in which there is an inability to process keratan sulphate.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p9785">   <span class="italic">Luis Morquio (1867–1935), Uruguayan physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2130"><span class="bold">Morton’s neuroma</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3790">   a disease of the foot characterized by a sudden cramp-like pain in the metatarsal area radiating to the fourth and fifth toes, and sometimes to the calf of the leg. Compression of the plantar nerve by a tumour, arthritic changes or bursitis is the common cause.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3795">   <span class="italic">Thomas George Morton (1835–1903), American surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2135"><span class="bold">Müller: cells</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3800">   neuroglial cells in the retina;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2140"><span class="bold">orbital muscle of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3805">   a collection of smooth muscle fibres spanning the infraorbital fissure. Its functions are uncertain;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2145"><span class="bold">superior tarsal muscle of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3810">   a thin lamina of smooth muscle that passes from the underside of levator palpebrae superioris to the upper margin of the superior tarsus.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3815">   <span class="italic">Heinrich Müller (1820–1864), Professor of Anatomy, Würzburg, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2150"><span class="bold">Müllerian duct</span> (also Müllerian duct syndrome)</span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3820">   paramesonephric ducts. Persistent Müllerian duct syndrome is a disorder of sexual development that affects males. Males with this disorder have normal male reproductive organs but also have a uterus and uterine tubes.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3825">   <span class="italic">Heinrich Müller (1820–1864), Professor of Anatomy, Würzburg, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2155"><span class="bold">Müller–Weiss disease</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3830">   spontaneous osteonecrosis of the navicular in the adult.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3835">   <span class="italic">Walther Müller (1888–1949), German orthopaedic surgeon; Konrad Weiss (1891–1976), Austrian radiologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2160"><span class="bold">Nabothian cyst, follicle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3840">   a retention cyst of the uterine cervix.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3845">   <span class="italic">Martin Naboth (1675–1721), Professor of Medicine, Leipzig, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2165"><span class="bold">Newton: Newtonian equations</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3850">   equations using the SI unit of force (N), which, when applied in a vacuum to a body having a mass of 1<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>kg, accelerates it at the rate of 1<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>m/sec<sup>2</sup>;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2170"><span class="bold">Newton’s second law of motion</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3855">   applied force=mass×acceleration.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3860">   <span class="italic">Sir Isaac Newton (1643–1727), English mathematician and physicist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2175"><span class="bold">Nissl: bodies, granules</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3865">   basophilic granules in the cytoplasm of neuronal somata;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2180"><span class="bold">staining technique</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3870">   a specific stain for Nissl granules.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3875">   <span class="italic">Franz Nissl (1860–1919), neurologist successively at Frankfurt, Heidelberg and Munich, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2185"><span class="bold">Nitabuch’s layer, stria</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3880">   a layer of fibrinoid matrix between the basal plate of the placenta and the endometrium.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3885">   <span class="italic">Raissa Nitabuch, nineteenth-century German physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2190"><span class="bold">Noonan syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3890">   autosomal dominant RASopathy. Clinical features are short stature, low-set ears and minor skeletal deformities of which the commonest are pectus excavatum and cubitus valgus.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3895">   <span class="italic">Jacqueline Anne Noonan (1928– ), American paediatric cardiologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2195"><span class="bold">Nuck, canal of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3900">   a diverticulum of the peritoneal membrane extending into the inguinal canal, accompanying the round ligament in the female, or the testis in its descent into the scrotum in the male; usually completely obliterated in the female.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3905">   <span class="italic">Anton Nuck (1650–1692), Dutch anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2200"><span class="bold">Nuel, spaces of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3910">   spaces between the outer rods of Corti and hair cells.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3915">   <span class="italic">Jean Pierre Nuel (1847–1920), Professor of Otology, Louvain and later Liège, Belgium.</span><span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E159" id="pagebreak_1.464E159"/><a id="pg1464e.157"/></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2205"><span class="bold"><span class="italic">Oddi, sphincter of</span></span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3920">   the sphincter at the termination of the common bile duct. The sphincter had already been described by Glisson <span class="italic">(see above)</span> in the seventeenth century.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3925">   <span class="italic">Ruggero Oddi (1845–1906), surgeon, Rome, Italy.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2210"><span class="bold">Odland bodies</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3930">   small, lamellated structures (keratinosomes) in the granular layer of the epidermis, containing hydrophobic phospholipid.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3935">   <span class="italic">George Fisher Odland (1922–1997), American dermatologist and electron microscopist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2215"><span class="bold">Ondine’s curse</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3940">   primary alveolar hypoventilation.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3945">   <span class="italic">Ondine, a sea nymph in German mythology, who cursed an unfaithful human lover by abolishing the automaticity of his bodily functions.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2220"><span class="bold">Onodi cell</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3950">   a sphenoethmoidal cell formed by lateral and posterior pneumatization of the most posterior ethmoid cells over the sphenoid sinus.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3955">   <span class="italic">A Onodi, twentieth-century Hungarian laryngologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2225"><span class="bold">Onuf, nucleus of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3960">   neurones in lamina IX of the sacral spinal cord involved in the maintenance of micturition and defecatory continence.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3965">   <span class="italic">Bronislaw Onuf-Onufrowicz (1863–1928), Russian-born American neurologist of Polish descent.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2230"><span class="bold">Oort, anastomosis of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3970">   a link between the saccular and cochlear nerves at the bottom of the internal auditory meatus (Oort H 1918 Über die Verästelung des Nervus octavus bei Säugetieren (Modell des Utriculus und Sacculus des Kainchens). Anat Anz 851:272–80).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3975">   <span class="italic">H Oort, Dutch anatomist, Utrecht.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2235"><span class="bold"><span class="italic">Oppenheim’s dystonia</span></span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3980">   Oppenheim described dystonia musculorum deformans (DMD), a movement disorder characterized by twisting or turning movements and abnormal postures. Now called early-onset primary torsion dystonia, this condition is an autosomal dominant disorder most commonly associated with deletion of GAG in the coding region of the DYT1 gene encoding torsinA. It has been suggested that the condition should be referred to as ‘Oppenheim’s dystonia’.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p3985">   <span class="italic">Hermann Oppenheim (1858–1919), German neurologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2240"><span class="bold"><span class="italic">Osborne, arcuate ligament</span></span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3990">   otherwise known as the cubital tunnel retinaculum, Osborne’s fascia, Osborne’s band, or the tendinous arch. A band of fibrous tissue that spans between the humeral and ulnar heads of flexor carpi ulnaris and forms the roof of the cubital tunnel.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p9990">   <span class="italic">Geoffrey Vaughan Osborne (1918–2005), Welsh surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2245"><span class="bold">Osgood–Schlatter disease</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p3995">   osteochondrosis of the tibial tuberosity.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4000">   <span class="italic">Robert Bayley Osgood (1873–1956), Professor of Orthopaedic Surgery, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA; Carl Schlatter (1864–1934), Professor of Surgery, Zurich, Switzerland.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2250"><span class="bold">Ostmann’s fat pads</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4005">   two small fat deposits medial and lateral in the membranous part of the Eustachian tube.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4010">   <span class="italic">Paul Ostmann (1859–1945), German otologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2255"><span class="bold">Owen, contour lines of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4015">   accentuated incremental lines in the dentine, thought to be due to disturbances in the mineralization process. Defined by parallel deviations of neighbouring dentinal tubules.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4020">   <span class="italic">Sir Richard Owen (1804–1892), English anatomist and palaeontologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2260"><span class="bold">Pacchionian bodies</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4025">   arachnoid granulations.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4030">   <span class="italic">Antoine Pacchion (1665–1726), physician and anatomist, Rome, Italy.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2265"><span class="bold">Pacinian corpuscle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4035">   a pressure-sensitive mechanoreceptor.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4040">   <span class="italic">Filippo Pacini (1812–1883), Professor of Anatomy and Physiology, successively at Pisa and then Florence, Italy.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2270"><span class="bold">Paget’s disease</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4045">   chronic localized disorder of bone remodelling, with increased bone formation and resorption, often resulting in major long-bone and skull deformities.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4050">   <span class="italic">Sir James Paget (1814–1899), British surgeon and physiologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2275"><span class="bold"><span class="italic">Palomo procedure</span></span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4055">   retroperitoneal ligation of the internal spermatic vein between the anterior superior iliac spine and the renal vein (Palomo A 1949 Radical cure of varicocele by a new technique: preliminary report. J Urol 61:604–7).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2280"><span class="bold">Pancoast tumour</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4060">   an apical carcinoma of the lung involving C8 and T1 nerves, the cervical sympathetic chain and upper ribs.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4065">   <span class="italic">Henry Pancoast (1875–1939), Professor of Radiology, University of Pennsylvania, USA.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2285"><span class="bold">Paneth cells</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4070">   bacteriocidal lysozyme-secreting cells.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4075">   <span class="italic">Joseph Paneth (1857–1890), Professor of Physiology, first at Breslau, Poland, then Vienna, Austria.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2290"><span class="bold">Papez circuit</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4080">   a neuroanatomical circuit mediating emotion, involving the hippocampal formation, mammillary body, anterior nuclei of the thalamus and cingulate gyrus.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4085">   <span class="italic">James Wenceslas Papez (1883–1958), American neurologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2295"><span class="bold">Parkinson’s syndrome, disease</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4090">   the main symptoms of tremor, rigidity and slowness of movement caused by degeneration of dopaminergic neurones in the substantia nigra, usually occcur in late life and are more common in men.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4095">   <span class="italic">James Parkinson (1755–1824), English physician and paleontologist. In his Essay on the Shaking Palsy (1817), Parkinson established the disease that now bears his name as a clinical entity.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2300"><span class="bold">Parkinson’s triangle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4100">   the infratrochlear triangle. Defined by the inferior margin of the trochlear nerve from its beginning in the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus to its transit through the superior orbital fissure (medial border); the superior margin of the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve (lateral border); and a line connecting the entry points of these nerves into the cavernous sinus (base) (Parkinson D 1965 A surgical approach to the cavernous portion of the carotid artery. Anatomical studies and case report. J Neurosurg 23:474–83).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2305"><span class="bold">Parks, mucosal suspensory ligament of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4105">   a condensation of fibres at the level of the dentate line (Parks AG 1954 A note on the anatomy of the anal canal. Proc R Soc Med 47:997–8).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2310"><span class="bold">Passavant’s: muscle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4110">   the upper fibres of palatopharyngeus;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2315"><span class="bold">ridge, bar</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4115">   a projecting ridge, or bar, on the posterior wall of pharynx, which appears during swallowing.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4120">   <span class="italic">Phillip Gustav Passavant (1815–1893), surgeon, Frankfurt, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2320"><span class="bold">Petit’s triangle, lumbar triangle of Petit</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4125">   the inferior lumbar triangle bounded inferiorly by the iliac crest, anteriorly by external oblique and posteriorly by latissimus dorsi.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4130">   <span class="italic">Jean L Petit (1640–1750), French surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2325"><span class="bold">Peyer’s patches</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4135">   lymphoid aggregates in the ileum.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4140">   <span class="italic">Johann Conrad Peyer (1653–1712), Professor of Logic, Rhetoric and Medicine in Schaffhausen, Switzerland.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2330"><span class="bold">Peyronie’s disease</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4145">   induration of the corpora cavernosa of the penis, producing a fibrous chordee.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4150">   <span class="italic">François de la Peyronie (1678–1747), French surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2335"><span class="bold">Pfannenstiel incision</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4155">   a transverse curved abdominal incision with downward convexity, above the symphysis pubis.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4160">   <span class="italic">Hermann Johann Pfannenstiel (1862–1909), German gynaecologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2340"><span class="bold">Pfeiffer’s syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4165">   a congenital syndrome characterized by craniostenosis, abnormal skull shape, facial anomalies, syndactyly of hands and feet, and broad thumbs and great toes.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4170">   <span class="italic">Rudolf Arthur Pfeiffer (1931–2012), human geneticist, Saarbrücken, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2345"><span class="bold">Pierre Robin sequence</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4175">   micrognathia, U-shaped cleft palate and glossoptosis.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4180">   <span class="italic">Pierre Robin (1867–1950), French dentist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2350"><span class="bold">Poirier, space of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4185">   a discrete interval between the inferior margin of the fibres of the radioscaphocapitate ligament that attach to the body of the capitate and the palmar horn of the lunate.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4190">   <span class="italic">Paul Poirier (1853–1907), French surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2355"><span class="bold">Poiseuille’s law</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4195">   a mathematical expression of the flow rate for the laminar (nonturbulent) flow of fluids in circular tubes.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4200">   <span class="italic">Jean-Louis-Marie Poiseuille (1799–1869), French physician and physiologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2360"><span class="bold">Poland’s syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4205">   a condition that is comprised of ipsilateral breast and nipple hypoplasia and/or aplasia, deficiency of subcutaneous fat and axillary hair, absence of the sternal head of pectoralis major, hypoplasia of the rib cage, and hypoplasia of the upper extremity, including cutaneous syndactyly.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4210">   <span class="italic">Sir Alfred Poland (1822–1872), English surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2365"><span class="bold">Poswillo approach</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4215">   a percutaneous closed reduction technique for management of fractures of the zygoma.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4220">   <span class="italic">David Ernest Poswillo (1927–2003), maxillofacial surgeon, New Zealand.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2370"><span class="bold">Potter’s syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4225">   a rare condition combining a characteristic facial appearance with renal agenesis or hypoplasia and other defects.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4230">   <span class="italic">Edith Louise Potter (1901–1993), early twentieth-century American paediatric surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2375"><span class="bold">Pott’s abscess</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4235">   a tuberculous abscess of the spine.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4240">   <span class="italic">Sir Percivall Pott (1713 or 1714–1788), British surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2380"><span class="bold">Prader–Willi syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4245">   a rare genetic condition that causes a wide range of physical symptoms, learning difficulties and behavioural problems.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4250">   <span class="italic">Andrea Prader (1919–2001), Swiss paediatrician and endocrinologist; Heinrich Willi (1900–1971), Swiss paediatrician.</span><span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E160" id="pagebreak_1.464E160"/><a id="pg1464e.158"/></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2385"><span class="bold">Pringle manoeuvre</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4255">   the application of digital or mechanical pressure across the entire free edge of the lesser omentum, resulting in complete, temporary occlusion of the hepatic portal vein, hepatic artery and common bile duct.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4260">   <span class="italic">J Pringle the Elder (1863–1941), Australian surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2390"><span class="bold">Prinzmetal’s angina</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4265">   variant angina occurring at rest, manifesting on electrocardiography as episodic ST segment elevations, and caused by coronary artery spasms with or without superimposed coronary artery disease.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4270">   <span class="italic">Myron Prinzmetal (1908–1987), American cardiologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2395"><span class="bold">Probst, commissure of, Probst bundle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4275">   a callosal longitudinal bundle, seen in agenesis of the corpus callosum, when callosal fibres from the hemispheres fail to cross the midline and, instead, form thick bundles.<span class="italic">Moriz Probst (1867–1923), Austrian psychiatrist.</span></span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2400"><span class="bold">Prussak’s: fibres</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4280">   elastic and connective tissue fibre bounding the pars flaccida membranae tympani;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2405"><span class="bold">space</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4285">   the superior recess of the tympanic membrane.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4290">   <span class="italic">Alexander Prussak (1839–1897), Russian otologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2410"><span class="bold">Purkinje: cells, neurones</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4295">   large neurones forming a single eponymous layer in the cerebellar cortex;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2415"><span class="bold">fibres</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4300">   subendocardial muscle fibres.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4305">   <span class="italic">Johannes Purkinje (1787–1869), Professor of Physiology, Breslau, Poland, and then Prague, Czech Republic.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2420"><span class="bold">Ramsay Hunt syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4310">   herpes zoster involvement of the geniculate ganglion associated with facial paresis, hyperacusis, unilateral loss of taste, decrease in lacrimation and salivation, and otalgia.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4315">   <span class="italic">James Ramsay Hunt (1874–1937), Professor of Neurology, Columbia University, New York, USA.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2425"><span class="bold">Ranvier, nodes of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4320">   short (∼1<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>μm) gaps between adjacent myelin sheaths that are essential for the propagation of action potentials via saltatory conduction along myelinated axons.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4325">   <span class="italic">Louis-Antoine Ranvier (1835–1922), French anatomist and histopathologist, Paris, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2430"><span class="bold">Raschkow’s plexus</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4330">   a plexus of myelinated nerve fibres located between the core of the pulp of the tooth and the cell-rich zone; axons lose their myelin sheath (but not their Schwann cells) as they penetrate the cell-rich and cell-free zones to make synaptic contact with the odontoblast cell body in the pulp or odontoblastic process within the dentinal tubule; responsible for transmitting pain sensation from the pulp of the tooth.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4335">   I <span class="italic">Raschkow (1811–1872), German physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2435"><span class="bold">Rasmussen: bundle of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4340">   the olivocochlear tract;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2440"><span class="bold">Rasmussen’s encephalitis</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4345">   a rare, progressive, inflammatory disorder of the central nervous system.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4350">   <span class="italic">Theodore Brown Rasmussen (1910–2002), neurologist, Utah, USA.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2445"><span class="bold">Rathke’s pouch</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4355">   a diverticulum of the roof of the stomodeum, which forms the anterior pituitary gland.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4360">   <span class="italic">Martin Heinrich Rathke (1793–1860), Professor of Zoology and Anatomy, Königsberg, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2450"><span class="bold">Rayleigh scatter</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4365">   the scattering of light or other electromagnetic radiation by particles much smaller than the wavelength of the light.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4370">   <span class="italic">John William Strutt, 3rd Baron Rayleigh OM (1842–1919), Cavendish Professor of Physics, University of Cambridge, UK.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2455"><span class="bold">Raynaud’s disease</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4375">   idiopathic paroxysmal bilateral cyanosis of the digits due to arterial and arteriolar contraction, caused by cold or emotion.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4380">   <span class="italic">Maurice Raynaud (1834–1881), French physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2460"><span class="bold">Reichert’s cartilage</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4385">   a cartilage in the mesenchyme of the second branchial arch in the embryo, from which the stapes, styloid processes, stylohyoid ligaments and lesser cornua of the hyoid bone develop.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4390">   <span class="italic">Karl Bogislaus Reichert (1811–1883), German anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2465"><span class="bold">Reid’s baseline</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4395">   a plane that passes through the inferior margin of the orbit and the superior margin of the external acoustic meatus (external auditory canal).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4400">   <span class="italic">Robert William Reid (1851–1939), Scottish surgeon and anatomist. He proposed a method of cerebral localization where the topography of the brain could be related to a system of lines drawn between large and easily felt landmarks on the surface of the head.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2470"><span class="bold">Reil</span>: <span class="bold">circular sulcus of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4405">   the peri-insular sulcus (synonym: sulcus circularis insulae); the insular surface is delineated peripherally by the peri-insular sulcus, which is interrupted by the transverse insular gyrus running across the limen insulae;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2475"><span class="bold">island of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4410">   the insular lobe.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4415">   <span class="italic">Johann Christian Reil (1759–1813), German physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2480"><span class="bold">Reinke’s: crystals</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4420">   rod-shaped crystals in the interstitial cells of the testis and hilus cells of the ovary;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2485"><span class="bold">oedema</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4425">   chronic laryngitis with swelling of the membranous part of the vocal cords;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2490"><span class="bold">space</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4430">   a potential space between the vocal ligament and the overlying mucosa.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4435">   <span class="italic">Friedrich Berthold Reinke (1862–1919), French anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2495"><span class="bold">Reissner’s membrane</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4440">   the vestibular membrane of the cochlea.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4445">   <span class="italic">Ernst Reissner (1824–1878), Professor of Anatomy, Tartu, Estonia, and then Breslau, Poland.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2500"><span class="bold">Renshaw’s cells</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4450">   inhibitory interneurones modulating the response of anterior horn cells.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4455">   <span class="italic">Birdsy Renshaw (1911–1948), American neurologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2505"><span class="bold">Retzius: space of, cave of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4460">   the prevesical space or retropubic space;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2510"><span class="bold">veins of, retroperitoneal venous plexus of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4465">   porto-caval anastomoses formed from veins in the walls of the retroperitoneal viscera, forming communications between the mesenteric veins and the inferior vena cava.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4470">   <span class="italic">Andreas Adolf Retzius (1796–1860), Professor of Anatomy, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2515"><span class="bold">Retzius: cell</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4475">   see <span class="italic"><span class="bold">Cajal–Retzius cell</span></span>;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2520"><span class="bold">gyrus</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4480">   two small bulges on the medial segment of the hippocampal tail that consist of a CA1 subfield and the subiculum (Ziogas IA, Triarhou L 2016 Anders Retzius and his gyri. Neurol Sci 37:1861–6);</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2525"><span class="bold">inferior sagittal sulcus of the cuneus of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4485">   a structure that lies superior to the posterior part of the calcarine sulcus;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2530"><span class="bold">lines of, striae of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4490">   brown lines in the dental enamel;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2535"><span class="bold">superior sagittal sulcus of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4495">   a paracalcarine sulcus (Retzius G 1896 Das Menschenhirn. Königliche Buchdruckerei PA Norstedt und Söner, Stockholm).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4500">   <span class="italic">Gustav Magnus Retzius (1842–1919), Professor of Anatomy, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. Son of Andreas Adolf Retzius.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2540"><span class="bold">Rexed’s lamina</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4505">   subdivisions of cells of spinal cord grey matter.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4510">   <span class="italic">Bror Rexed (1914–2002), Swedish neuroanatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2545"><span class="bold">Riolan, arc of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4515">   the anastomosis between the middle and left colic arteries.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4520">   <span class="italic">Jean Riolan (Secondus) (1577–1657), Professor of Anatomy and Botany, Paris, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2550"><span class="bold">Rives–Stoppa–Wantz technique</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4525">   a technique that involves incising the posterior layer of the rectus sheath just lateral to the linea alba, allowing a retromuscular dissection to the lateral edge of the rectus sheath.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4530">   <span class="italic">Jean Rives (1922–2012), Rene Stoppa (1921–2006), French-Algerian surgeons; George E. Wantz (1923–2000), American surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2555">Rolando: cruciform sulcus of</span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4535">   the H-shaped orbital sulcus;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2560"><span class="bold">Rolandic fissure</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4540">   the central fissure of the cerebral hemisphere.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4545">   <span class="italic">Luigi Rolando (1773–1831), Italian anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2565"><span class="bold">Romberg sign</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4550">   swaying of the body or falling when standing with the feet close together and the eyes closed.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4555">   <span class="italic">Moritz Heinrich Romberg (1795–1873), German physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2570"><span class="bold">Rosenmüller, fossa of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4560">   the pharyngeal recess.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4565">   <span class="italic">Johann Christian Rosenmüller (1779–1820), Professor of Anatomy and Surgery, Leipzig, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2575"><span class="bold">Rosenthal: basal vein of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4570">   a vein that courses from the premesencephalic cistern, through the ambient cistern, and terminates in the quadrigeminal cistern;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2580"><span class="bold">Rosenthal’s canal</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4575">   the spiral canal in the modiolus of the cochlea.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4580">   <span class="italic">Isidor Rosenthal (1836–1915), physiologist, Greifswald, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2585"><span class="bold">Roser–Nelaton’s line</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4585">   a line drawn from the anterior superior iliac spine to the ischial tuberosity.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4590">   <span class="italic">Auguste Nélaton (1807–1873), French physician and surgeon; Wilhelm Roser (1817–1888), German surgeon and ophthalmologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2590"><span class="bold">Rotter’s node</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4595">   the lymph node between pectoralis major and minor.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4600">   <span class="italic">Josef Rotter (1857–1924), German surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2595"><span class="bold">Rouvière’s sulcus</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4605">   the incisura hepatis dextra (synonym: <a href="#def0990">Gans</a> incisura) (see Stringer MD 2009 Eponyms in Surgery and Anatomy of the Liver, Bile Ducts and Pancreas. London: Royal Society of Medicine).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2600"><span class="bold">Ruffini endings, bodies, corpuscles</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4610">   sensory nerve endings, originally described in the skin of the fingers.<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E161" id="pagebreak_1.464E161"/><a id="pg1464e.159"/></span><div class="para_indented" id="p4615">   <span class="italic">Angelo Ruffini (1887–1929), Professor of Histology, Bologna, Italy.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2605"><span class="bold">Russell</span>, <span class="bold">hook bundle of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4620">   uncinate fasciculus, where the crossed fibres from the fastigial nucleus pass dorsal to the superior cerebellar peduncle.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4625">   <span class="italic">James Samuel Risien Russell (1863–1939), Guyanese-British neurologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2610"><span class="bold">Sachs, sagittal striata of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4630">   extrastriate thalamocortical projections (internal sagittal stratum of Sachs); association fibres of the inferior longitudinal fasciculus (external sagittal stratum of Sachs).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4635">   <span class="italic">Heinrich Sachs (1863–1928), German neurologist and a student of Carl Wernicke in Breslau.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2615"><span class="bold">Saethre–Chotzen syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4640">   acrocephalosyndactyly type III. A very rare disorder characterized by the fusion of cranial structures, which sometimes produces an asymmetric head and face; low-set hairline; ptosis and/or widely spaced eyes; ‘beaked’ nose and possible deviated septum; and, sometimes, brachydactyly and syndactyly.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4645">   <span class="italic">Haakon Saethre (1891–1945), Norwegian psychiatrist; F. Chotzen (1932), German psychiatrist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2620"><span class="bold">Santorini: duct of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4650">   the accessory pancreatic duct;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2625"><span class="bold">fissures of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4655">   two fissures in the anterior cartilaginous wall of the external acoustic meatus;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2630"><span class="bold">plexus of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4660">   the retropubic venous plexus giving rise to the pudendal vein.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4665">   <span class="italic">Giovanni Domenico Santorini (1681–1737), Professor of Medicine and Anatomy, Venice, Italy.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2635"><span class="bold">Satiro’s ear</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4670">   usually known as Stahl’s syndrome or Satyr’s ear. A common congenital deformity of the auricle in which the helix is flattened and the upper crus of the antihelix is duplicated.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4675">   <span class="italic">Friedrich Stahl (1811–1879), German physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2640"><span class="bold">Sattler’s layer</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4680">   a layer of medium-sized blood vessels in the choroid, derived from the short posterior ciliary arteries.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4685">   <span class="italic">Hubert Sattler (1844–1928), Professor of Ophthalmology, Leipzig University Eye Hospital, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2645"><span class="bold">Scarpa’s: fascia</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4690">   the fibrous layer of the superficial fascia of the lower abdomen;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2650"><span class="bold">ganglion</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4695">   the vestibular ganglion.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4700">   <span class="italic">Antonio Scarpa (1747–1832), Professor of Anatomy, Padua, Italy.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2655"><span class="bold">Schaffer collaterals</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4705">   the projections from pyramidal cells of fields CA3 and CA2 to CA1 in the hippocampus.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4710">   <span class="italic">Max Schaffer (1852–1923), German neurologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2660">Scheuermann’s osteochondritis, disease, kyphosis</span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4715">   osteochondrosis of the vertebrae.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4720">   <span class="italic">Holger Werfel Scheuermann (1834–1915), German biochemist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2665"><span class="bold">Schiff’s stain, reagent</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4725">   a stain for aldehydes, used with periodic acid (PAS) to detect carbohydrates.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4730">   <span class="italic">Hugo Schiff (1834–1915), German biochemist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2670"><span class="bold">Schirmer test</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4735">   a test that measures lacrimal gland secretory capacity; used principally to diagnose dry eye syndrome.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4740">   <span class="italic">Otto Schirmer (1864–1918), German ophthalmologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2675"><span class="bold">Schlemm, canal of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4745">   a canal at the junction of the cornea and sclera.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4750">   <span class="italic">Freidrich Schlemm (1795–1858), Professor of Anatomy, Berlin, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2680"><span class="bold">Schmidt–Lanterman incisures, cleft</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4755">   a helical inclusion of glial cytoplasm within the myelin sheaths of central and peripheral nerves.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4760">   <span class="italic">Henry Schmidt (1823–1888), pathologist, Charity Hospital, New Orleans, USA; AJ Lanterman, nineteenth-century anatomist, Strasbourg, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2685"><span class="bold">Schütz, fasciculus of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4765">   the dorsal longitudinal fasciculus.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4770">   <span class="italic">Hugo Schütz (1859–1923), neurologist, Leipzig, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2690"><span class="bold">Schwalbe</span>: <span class="bold">line of, ring of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4775">   the anterior border ring of the cornea;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2695"><span class="bold">nucleus of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4780">   the vestibular nucleus;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2700"><span class="bold">pocket</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4785">   a depression between the tendinous arch of levator ani and the lateral wall of the pelvis.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4790">   <span class="italic">Gustav Albert Schwalbe (1844–1916), German anatomist and anthropologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2705"><span class="bold">Schwann cell</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4795">   the major glial cell of the peripheral nervous system.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4800">   <span class="italic">Theodor Schwann (1810–1882), Professor of Anatomy first in Louvain and then Liège, Belgium. One of the instigators of the cell theory.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2710"><span class="bold">Seessel’s pouch</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4805">   a small endodermal diverticulum that projects towards the brain from the cranial end of the foregut, immediately caudal to the buccopharyngeal membrane.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4810">   <span class="italic">Albert Seessel (1850–1910), American embryologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2715"><span class="bold">Segond fracture</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4815">   an avulsion fracture of the lateral margin of the lateral tibial plateau, with a significant association with anterior cruciate ligament and meniscal injuries.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4820">   <span class="italic">Paul Ferdinand Segond (1851–1912), French orthopaedic surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2720"><span class="bold">Semon’s law</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4825">   an obsolete ‘law’ stating that injury to the recurrent laryngeal nerve results in paralysis of the abductor muscles of the vocal cords before paralysis of the adductor muscles.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4830">   <span class="italic">Sir Felix Semon (1849–1921), German laryngologist in the UK.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2725"><span class="bold">Sertoli cells</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4835">   the supporting cells of the testicular tubules.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4840">   <span class="italic">Enrico Sertoli (1842–1910), Professor of Experimental Physiology, Milan, Italy.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2730"><span class="bold">Sever’s disease</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4845">   inflammation of the calcaneal apophysis in children and adolescents.<span class="italic">James Warren Sever (1878–1964), American orthopaedic surgeon.</span></span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2735"><span class="bold">Sharpey’s fibres</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4850">   connective tissue joining periosteum to bone.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4855">   <span class="italic">William Sharpey (1802–1880), Professor of Anatomy successively at Edinburgh and University College, London, UK.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2740"><span class="bold">Sibson’s fascia</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4860">   the suprapleural membrane.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4865">   <span class="italic">Francis Sibson (1814–1846), English surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2745"><span class="bold">Simmonds–Thompson test</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4870">   a diagnostic tool for Achilles tendon rupture: absence of foot plantar flexion on calf compression is interpreted as a positive test result.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4875">   <span class="italic">Franklin Adin Simmonds (1910–1983), English orthopaedic surgeon; Theodore Campbell Thompson (1902–1986), American orthopaedic surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2750"><span class="bold">Sistrunk’s procedure</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4880">   a procedure for removal of a thyroglossal duct cyst. It involves resection of the entire cyst, the central portion of the hyoid bone, and the thyroglossal duct tract that terminates at the foramen caecum. Several modifications of the procedure have been described.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4885">   <span class="italic">Walter Ellis Sistrunk (1880–1933), American surgeon; originally described this operation in 1920.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2755"><span class="bold">Sjögren’s connective tissue disease</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4890">   a chronic autoimmune disease characterized by keratoconjunctivitis sicca and many other symptoms.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4895">   <span class="italic">Henrik Samuel Conrad Sjögren (1899–1986), Swedish ophthalmologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2760"><span class="bold">Skene’s glands</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4900">   the paraurethral ducts of the female urethra.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4905">   <span class="italic">Alexander Johnston Chalmers Skene (1838–1900), gynaecologist, New York, USA.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2765"><span class="bold">Skoog, fibres of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4910">   transverse fibres of the palmar aponeurosis of the hand.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4915">   <span class="italic">Tord Skoog (1915–1977), Foundation Professor of Plastic Surgery, University of Uppsala, Sweden.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2770"><span class="bold">Sly syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4920">   mucopolysaccharidosis type VII (MPS-VII), an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disease caused by a deficiency of β-glucuronidase.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4925">   <span class="italic">William S Sly (1932– ), American physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2775">Sondergaard</span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4930">   see <span class="italic"><span class="bold">Waterston, groove of.</span></span></span><div class="para_indented" id="p4935">   <span class="italic">Tyge Sondergaard (1914–1990), Danish cardiac surgeon. The first surgeon to use cold chemical cardioplegia in open heart surgery.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2780"><span class="bold">Spence, tail of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4940">   the projection of mammary glandular tissue extending into the axillary region, sometimes forming a visible mass that may enlarge premenstrually or during lactation.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4945">   <span class="italic">James Spence (1812–1882), Scottish surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2785"><span class="bold">Spiegel, Spigelian, Spieghel</span>: <span class="bold">hernia</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4950">   (1–2% of all hernias – the protrusion of extraperitoneal fat, peritoneal sac or organ(s) through a congenital or acquired defect in the Spiegelian aponeurosis (i.e. the aponeurosis of transversus abdominis limited by the semilunar line laterally and the lateral edge of rectus muscle medially). Although named after Adriaan van der Spieghel, the semilunar line (linea Spiegeli) was only described by Spieghel in 1645. Josef Klinkosch first defined the Spiegelian hernia as a defect in the semilunar line in 1764. Defects in the aponeurosis of transversus abdominis (mainly distal to the arcuate line and more often in obese individuals) have been considered the principal aetiological factor;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2790"><span class="bold">line</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4955">   the linea semilunaris (semilunar line);</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2795"><span class="bold">lobe</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4960">   the caudate lobe of the liver.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4965">   <span class="italic">Adriaan van den Spiegel (1578–1625), Flemish anatomist and botanist. Name also written as Spieghel, Spigel, Adrianus Spigelius, Spiegelius, Adriano Spigeli.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2800"><span class="bold">Sprengel deformity</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4970">   congenital elevation of the scapula with rotation of its lower angle towards the spine.<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E162" id="pagebreak_1.464E162"/><a id="pg1464e.160"/></span><div class="para_indented" id="p4975">   <span class="italic">Otto Gerhard Karl Sprengel (1852–1915), German surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2805"><span class="bold">Stahl’s deformity</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4980">   congenital deformity of the ear characterised by a broad helix, absence of the fossa of the antihelix and upper scaphoid fossa.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p4985">   <span class="italic">Friedrich Stahl (1811–1879), German physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2810"><span class="bold">Stanford classification</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4990">   a widely used system of classifying aortic dissections first proposed by a group of cardiovascular surgeons at Stanford University, in which dissections that involve the ascending aorta are classified as type A, regardless of the site of the primary intimal tear, and all other dissections as type B (Daily PO, Trueblood HW, Stinson EB et al 1970 Management of acute aortic dissections. Ann Thorac Surg 10:237–47).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2815"><span class="bold">Stener lesion</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p4995">   the ulnar collateral ligament is normally covered by the aponeurotic fibres of the tendon of adductor pollicis. Following avulsion, the proximal end of the ligament can become superficially displaced around the proximal free edge of the aponeurotic insertion of adductor pollicis, producing a Stener lesion (Stener B 1962 Displacement of the ruptured ulnar collateral ligament of the metacarpo-phalangeal joint of the thumb. J Bone Joint Surg Br 44:869–79).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5000">   <span class="italic">Bertil Stener, Swedish orthopaedic surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2820"><span class="bold">Sternberg’s canal</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5005">   otherwise known as the lateral craniopharyngeal canal. Originally described as a membranous space in the lateral wall of the sphenoid sinus, this rare small canal was once believed to be the primary cause of spontaneous lateral sphenoid CSF leaks.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5010">   <span class="italic">Maximilian Sternberg (1863–1934), Austrian physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2825"><span class="bold">Stickler syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5015">   hereditary progressive arthro-ophthalmodystrophy, characterized by a distinctive flattened facial appearance, numerous ocular abnormalities, sensorineural or conductive hearing loss, and skeletal abnormalities that affect the joints.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5020">   <span class="italic">Gunnar B Stickler (1925–2010), German paediatrician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2830"><span class="bold">Stieda’s process</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5025">   the lateral tubercle of the talus, when elongated.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5030">   <span class="italic">Christian Hermann Ludwig Stieda (1837–1918), German anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2835"><span class="bold">Struthers: arcade of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5035">   a thickening of the anteromedial aspect of the medial intermuscular septum, forming a myofibrous sheath around the ulnar nerve after it passes from the anterior to the posterior compartment of the arm;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2840"><span class="bold">ligament of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5040">   a ligamentous or muscular structure (often an extension of the humeral head of pronator teres), passing between the medial epicondyle and supracondylar processes of the humerus in approximately 1% of individuals.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5045">   <span class="italic">Sir John Struthers (1823–1899), Scottish anatomist, professor and surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2845"><span class="bold">Sylvian: aqueduct</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5050">   the midbrain channel connecting the third and fourth cerebral ventricles;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2850"><span class="bold">cistern</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5055">   the subarachnoid space associated with the lateral cerebral sulcus (Sylvian fissure). It contains the M1 segment of the middle cerebral artery, the origin of the lenticulostriate arteries, and proximal parts of the middle cerebral artery;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2855"><span class="bold">fissure</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5060">   the lateral cerebral fissure;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2860"><span class="bold">vein</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5065">   the superficial middle cerebral vein.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5070">   <span class="italic">François de la Boe Sylvius (1614–1672), Professor of Medicine, Leiden, Netherlands.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2865"><span class="bold">Takayasu’s arteritis</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5075">   a granulomatous vasculitis with massive intimal fibrosis and vascular narrowing mainly affecting the aorta and its large branches (aka aortic arch syndrome, nonspecific aortoarteritis, pulseless disease).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5080">   <span class="italic">Mikito Takayasu (1860–1938), Japanese ophthalmologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2870"><span class="bold">Tamm–Horsfall protein</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5085">   the most abundant protein in normal urine.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5090">   <span class="italic">Igor Tamm (1922–1995), virologist, New York, USA; Frank Lappin Horsfall (1906–1971), American clinician and virologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2875"><span class="bold">Tanner’s stages</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5095">   scales for stages of sexual development in puberty.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5100">   <span class="italic">James Mourilyan Tanner (1920–2010), British paediatric endocrinologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2880"><span class="bold">Taussig–Bing anomaly, syndrome, disease</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5105">   transposition of the aorta to the right ventricle and malposition of the pulmonary artery with subpulmonary ventricular septal defect.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5110">   <span class="italic">Helen B Taussig (1898–1986), American paediatrician; Richard Bing (1909–2010), American physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2885"><span class="bold">Tay–Sachs disease</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5115">   a lysosomal storage disorder affecting neurones.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5120">   <span class="italic">Warren Tay (1843–1927), ophthalmologist, London, UK; Bernard Sachs (1858–1944), neurologist, New York, USA.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2890"><span class="bold">Tenon’s capsule</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5125">   the fascial sheath of the eyeball.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5130">   <span class="italic">Jacques René Tenon (1724–1816), Professor of Pathology, Academy of Sciences, Paris. Chief Surgeon, Salpêtrière, Paris, France. Specialized in ophthalmology.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2895"><span class="bold">Testut, ligament of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5135">   a radio-scaphoid-lunate connection.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5140">   <span class="italic">Leo Testut (1849–1925), Professor of Anatomy, Lyons, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2900"><span class="bold">Thebesian: valve</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5145">   the valve at the orifice of the coronary sinus;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2905"><span class="bold">veins</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5150">   venae cordis minimae of the heart.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5155">   <span class="italic">Adam Christian Thebesius (1686–1732), anatomist and pathologist, Leiden, Netherlands.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2910"><span class="bold">Thomine, retrovascular cord of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5160">   a pathological cord formed from the retrovascular fascia or band of Thomine (longitudinally oriented fibres dorsal to the neurovascular bundle) (Thomine JM 1985 The development and anatomy of the digital fascia. In: Hueston JT, Tubiana R eds, Dupuytren’s Disease, 2nd ed. New York: Churchill Livingstone, pp. 3–12).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2915"><span class="bold">Thompson, posterior (dorsal) approach of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5165">   a surgical approach to treat fractures of the proximal and middle thirds of the radius and to address injury to the proximal radioulnar joint (Thompson JE 1918 Anatomical methods of approach in operations on the long bones or extremities. Ann Surg 68:309–29).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2920"><span class="bold">Thornwaldt cyst</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5170">   a benign cyst located in the upper posterior nasopharynx, covered by mucosa anteriorly and bounded by longus muscles posteriorly.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5175">   <span class="italic">Gustav Ludwig Tornwaldt/Thornwaldt (1843–1910), German physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2925"><span class="bold">Tinel’s sign</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5180">   the fact that lightly tapping (percussing) over a nerve trunk that has been damaged or is regenerating following trauma causes a sensation of tingling and pain in its distribution up to the site of regeneration. In closed injuries, percussion of the skin over a nerve in which axons have been ruptured evokes sensations that are usually described as a wave or surge of pins and needles into the cutaneous distribution of the nerve.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5185">   <span class="italic">Jules Tinel (1879–1952), French neurologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2930"><span class="bold">Todaro, tendon of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5190">   a variable tendinous strand attached to the valvular fold at the termination of the inferior vena cava. It forms the superior border of the triangle of Koch.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5195">   <span class="italic">Francesco Todaro (1839–1918), Professor of Anatomy at Messina and then Rome, Italy.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2935"><span class="bold">Toldt’s fascia, fusion fascia of Toldt</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5200">   an avascular fascial plane posterior to the ascending or descending colon and mesocolon, kidney and tail of the pancreas.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5205">   <span class="italic">Carl Toldt (1840–1920), Austrian anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2940"><span class="bold">Towne’s projection</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5210">   positioning of the head in the radiological examination of the foramen magnum and posterior cranial fossa.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5215">   <span class="italic">Edward Towne (1883–1957), neurosurgeon, Stanford Medical School, California, USA.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2945"><span class="bold">Treacher Collins syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5220">   mandibulofacial dysostosis.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5225">   <span class="italic">Edward Treacher Collins (1862–1932), English surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2950"><span class="bold">Treitz: fascia of, fusion fascia of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5230">   the fascia behind the head of the pancreas;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2955"><span class="bold">ligament of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5235">   a fold of peritoneum over the suspensory muscle of the duodenum;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2960"><span class="bold">muscle of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5240">   the suspensory muscle of the duodenum (musculus suspensorius duodenii).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5245">   <span class="italic">Václav (Wenzel) Treitz (1819–1872), Professor of Pathological Anatomy, Jagellonian University, Prague, Czech Republic.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2965"><span class="bold">Trendelenburg’s sign, gait</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5250">   a dipping gait due to hip abductor dysfunction, e.g. in congenital dislocation of the hip or paralysis of gluteus medius and minimus.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5255">   <span class="italic">Friedrich Trendelenburg (1844–1924), Professor of Surgery successively at Rostock, Bonn and Leipzig, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2970"><span class="bold">Treves, bloodless fold of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5260">   a peritoneal fold adjacent to the mesoappendix.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5265">   <span class="italic">Sir Frederick Treves (1853–1923), surgeon, London Hospital, UK. Drained the appendicular abscess of King Edward VII in 1902.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2975"><span class="bold">Trolard: canal of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5270">   the sphenoparietal canal: a short bony canal that contains the anterior branches of the middle meningeal vessels;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2980"><span class="bold">superior anastomotic vein of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5275">   the vein that connects the superior sagittal sinus and the superficial middle cerebral vein (of Sylvius).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5280">   <span class="italic">Paulin Trolard (1842–1910), French anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2985">Tsai, ventral tegmental area of</span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5285">   the ventral tegmental area.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5290">   <span class="italic">Tsai Chiao (1897–1990), Chinese physiologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2990"><span class="bold">Tuffier’s line</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5295">   a line that may be drawn between the highest points of the iliac crests on which the spine of L4 usually lies in adults.<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E163" id="pagebreak_1.464E163"/><a id="pg1464e.161"/></span><div class="para_indented" id="p5300">   <span class="italic">Théodore Tuffier (1857–1929), French surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def2995"><span class="bold">Türk, bundle of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5305">   corticopontine fibres that originate from parietal, occipital and temporal lobes.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5310">   <span class="italic">Ludwig Türck (1810–68), Austrian neurologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3000"><span class="bold">Turner syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5315">   a disorder of gonadal differentiation, marked by short stature, undifferentiated (streak) gonads and variable anomalies that may include webbing of the neck, low posterior hair line and cardiac defects.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5320">   <span class="italic">Henry Hubert Turner (1892–1970), American endocrinologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3005"><span class="bold">Twining’s line</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5325">   the line between the tuberculum sellae and the torcular.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5330">   <span class="italic">Edward Wing Twining (1887–1939), often cited as the ‘father of British neuroradiology’.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3010"><span class="bold">Urbach–Wiethe syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5335">   lipoid proteinosis, an autosomal recessive multisystem genodermatosis that primarily affects the skin, oral cavity and larynx, with the deposition of an amorphous hyaline material as a consequence of mutation of extracellular matrix protein 1 (ECM1). Neurological complications include basal ganglia calcification, usually bilaterally symmetrical.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5340">   <span class="italic">Erich Urbach (1893–1946), Austrian dermatologist; Camillo Wiethe (1889–1949), Austrian otorhinolaryngologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3015"><span class="bold">Usher syndrome, Usher–Hallgren syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5345">   a condition characterized by hearing loss or deafness and progressive loss of vision caused by retinitis pigmentosa. The three major types of Usher syndrome (types I, II and III) are distinguished by their severity and the age at which signs and symptoms appear (synonyms: Hallgren syndrome, dysacusis syndrome, dystrophia retinae dysacusis syndrome).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5350">   <span class="italic">Charles Howard Usher (1865–1942), Scottish ophthalmologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3020"><span class="bold">Valoean sheath</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5355">   the connective tissue capsule surrounding the liver.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5360">   <span class="italic">Valoeus, an anatomist from the Middle Ages, who first described the liver capsule.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3025"><span class="bold">Valsalva:</span> <span class="bold">aortic sinuses of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5365">   the aortic sinuses;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3030"><span class="bold">manoeuvre</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5370">   any forced expiratory effort (‘strain’) against a closed airway, whether at the nose and mouth or at the glottis.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5375">   <span class="italic">Antonio Maria Valsalva (1666–1723), Professor of Anatomy, Bologna, Italy.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3035"><span class="bold">van de Woude’s syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5380">   an autosomal dominant syndrome characterized by a cleft lip or cleft palate, and/or distinctive pits of the lower lips, the most common syndrome associated with cleft lip or cleft palate (Van der Woude A 1954 Fistula labii inferioris congenita and its association with cleft lip and palate. Am J Hum Genet 6:244–56).</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3040"><span class="bold">van Gieson technique, elastic van Gieson technique</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5385">   a solution of trinitrophenol and acid fuchsin used to stain connective tissue elastin on histological sections.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5390">   <span class="italic">Ira Thompson van Gieson (1866–1913), American neuropathologist, New York, USA.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3045"><span class="bold">Vater, ampulla of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5395">   the ampulla at the junction of the common hepatic and pancreatic ducts.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5400">   <span class="italic">Abraham Vater (1684–1751), Professor of Anatomy, Botany, Pathology and Therapeutics, Wittenburg, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3050"><span class="bold">Velpeau, space of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5405">   (quadrangular space, quadrilateral space, foramen humerotricipitale): a space bounded by subscapularis, the capsule of the shoulder joint and teres minor superiorly, teres major inferiorly, the long head of triceps medially and the surgical neck of the humerus laterally. The axillary nerve and the posterior circumflex humeral artery and vein pass obliquely through the space.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5410">   <span class="italic">Alfred-Armand-Louis-Marie Velpeau (1795–1867), French anatomist and surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3055"><span class="bold">Vesalius, foramen of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5415">   a small foramen for the emissary vein immediately anterior and medial to the foramen ovale in the sphenoid bone.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5420">   <span class="italic">Andreas Vesalius (1514–1564), Professor of Anatomy, Padua, Italy.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3060"><span class="bold">Vicq d’Azyr, band or stripe of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5425">   a white band or stripe in the occipital cortex; also described by Gennari in 1782.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5430">   <span class="italic">Félix Vicq d’Azyr (1748–94), French physician, anatomist, historian and social reformer who is often described as the greatest comparative anatomist of the eighteenth century before Cuvier.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3065"><span class="bold">Vidian: canal</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5435">   the pterygoid canal;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3070"><span class="bold">nerve</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5440">   the nerve of the pterygoid canal.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5445">   <span class="italic">Guido Guidi Vidius (1500–1561), Professor of Medicine, Pisa, Italy.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3075"><span class="bold">Vieussens: anulus of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5450">   the ansa subclavia of sympathetic nerves; a tenuous anastomosis around the right ventricular outflow tract</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3080"><span class="bold">arterial ring</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5455">   an inconstant anastomosis around the right ventricular outflow tract that may provide an important collateral circulation in cases of arterial occlusion.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5460">   <span class="italic">Raymond de Vieussens (1641–1715), physician and anatomist, Montpellier, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3085"><span class="bold">Virchow–Robin space</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5465">   a perivascular space in the central nervous system.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5470">   <span class="italic">Rudolf Ludwig Virchow (1821–1902), Professor of Pathological Anatomy, Würzburg, and then Berlin, Germany; Charles-Philippe Robin (1821–1885), Professor of Histology, Paris, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3090"><span class="bold">Vogt, palisades of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5475">   crests of epithelial folds at the limbus that run radially towards the cornea from the bulbar conjunctiva.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5480">   <span class="italic">Alfred Vogt (1879–1943), Swiss ophthalmologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3095"><span class="bold">Voigt’s lines, Voigt–Futcher lines</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5485">   pigmentary demarcation lines or hair tracts (synonym: Futcher’s lines).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5490">   <span class="italic">Christian August Voigt (1809–1890), Professor of Anatomy, Vienna, Austria; Palmer Howard Futcher (1910–2004), US–Canadian physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3100"><span class="bold">Volkmann’s: canals</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5495">   osseous canals carrying blood vessels from the periosteum and between osteons;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3105"><span class="bold">ischaemic contracture</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5500">   a permanent flexion contracture of the hand at the wrist, resulting in a claw-like deformity of the hand and fingers.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5505">   <span class="italic">Alfred Wilhelm Volkmann (1800–1877), Professor of Anatomy and Physiology, first at Dorpat, Estonia, and later Halle, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3110"><span class="bold">von Brunn’s nests</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5510">   ectopic (subepithelial) urothelial masses in the urinary tract.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5515">   <span class="italic">Albert von Brunn (1849–1872), Professor of Anatomy, Göttingen, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3115"><span class="bold">von Ebner’s: fissure</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5520">   in the development of the back, sclerotomal populations form from the ventral half of the epithelial somite. An intrasegmental boundary (fissure or cleft, sometimes termed von Ebner’s fissure), which is initially filled with extracellular matrix and a few cells, appears within the sclerotome and divides it into loosely packed cranial, and densely packed caudal, halves;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3120"><span class="bold">glands</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5525">   serous glands of the tongue, located beneath the circumvallate and foliate papillae;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3125"><span class="bold">lines</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5530">   incremental lines of dentine.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5535">   <span class="italic">Anton Gilbert Viktor von Ebner (also commonly called Viktor von Ebner-Rofenstein) (1842–1925), Professor of Histology and Embryology, Innsbruck, Austria.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3130"><span class="bold">Von Economo neurone</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5540">   spindle neurone characterized by a single apical dendrite, a single basal dendrite and a long projection axon.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5545">   <span class="italic">Constantin von Economo (1876–1931), Austrian psychiatrist and neurologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3135"><span class="bold">von Hippel–Lindau disease</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5550">   an autosomal dominant genetic condition with high penetrance resulting from a deletion or mutation in the VHL tumour suppressor gene on chromosome 3p25.3. Characterized by retinal and CNS haemangioblastomas, pheochromocytomas, multiple cysts in the pancreas and kidneys. Benign tumours have an increased potential for malignant transformation.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5555">   <span class="italic">Eugen Adolf Arthur von Hippel (1867–1939), German ophthalmologist; Arvid Vilhelm Lindau (1892–1958), Swedish pathologist and bacteriologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3140"><span class="bold">von Willebrand factor</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5560">   the factor released from endothelial cells and platelets, promoting platelet adhesion and blood clotting. Deficient or defective factor production (usually inherited as an autosomal dominant trait) causes von Willebrand disease.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5565">   <span class="italic">Erik Adolf von Willebrand (1870–1949), Finnish haematologist. Described the eponymous hereditary clotting disorder in 1926.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3145"><span class="bold">Waardenburg type II syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5570">   a deafness syndrome associated with pigmentary disturbances. A group of heterogeneous entities distinguished from Waardenburg type I syndrome by the absence of dystopia canthorum.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5575">   <span class="italic">Petrus Johannes Waardenburg (1886–1979), Dutch ophthalmologist and geneticist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3150"><span class="bold">Waldeyer: presacral fascia of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5580">   the floor of the retrorectal space (Jin ZM, Peng JY, Zhu QC et al 2011 Waldeyer’s fascia: anatomical location and relationship to neighboring fasciae in retrorectal space. Surg Radiol Anat 33:851–4);</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3155"><span class="bold">Waldeyer’s ring</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5585">   a ring of lymphoid tissue that includes the palatine, pharyngeal, tubal and lingual tonsils;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3160"><span class="bold">Waldeyer’s sheath</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5590">   adventitia of distal segments of the ureter.<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E164" id="pagebreak_1.464E164"/><a id="pg1464e.162"/></span><div class="para_indented" id="p5595">   <span class="italic">Heinrich Wilhelm Waldeyer (1836–1921), Professor of Pathology at Breslau, Poland, and then Berlin, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3165"><span class="bold">Wallenberg’s syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5600">   a lesion of the lateral medullary region of the brainstem.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5605">   <span class="italic">Adolf Wallenberg (1862–1949), German physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3170"><span class="bold">Wallerian degeneration</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5610">   degeneration of myelinated and unmyelinated axons distal to any injury that transects the axons and separates their distal segments from their centrally placed neuronal cell bodies.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5615">   <span class="italic">Augustus Volney Waller (1816–1870), British neurophysiologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3175"><span class="bold">Walther, ganglion of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5620">   the solitary, retroperitoneal median ganglion impar or sacrococcygeal ganglion, which lies anterior to the sacrococcygeal junction; it represents the distal termination of the sympathetic chains.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5625">   <span class="italic">August F Walther (1688–1746), German anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3180">Wartenberg’s disease, sign, symptom</span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5630">   radial sensory nerve entrapment.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5635">   <span class="italic">Robert Wartenberg (1866–1956), American neurologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3185"><span class="bold">Warwick’s foramen</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5640">   a foramen located between the inferior end of the superior orbital fissure and the foramen rotundum.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5645">   <span class="italic">Roger Warwick (1912–1991), English anatomist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3190"><span class="bold">Waterston, groove of/interatrial sulcus of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5650">   the sulcus separating the right and left atria of the heart (aka Sondergaard’s groove).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5655">   <span class="italic">David Waterston (1910–1985), Scottish cardiothoracic surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3195"><span class="bold">Weigert–Meyer rule</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5660">   the rule that, when complete, duplicated ureters insert separately into the bladder; the upper pole ureter is the ectopic ureter and its orifice inserts inferomedially in the bladder; the lower pole ureter is the normal ureter<span class="italic">Carl Weigert (1845–1904), German pathologist; Robert Meyer(1864–1947), German gynaecologist and pathologist</span>.</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3200"><span class="bold">Weigert, staining technique of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5665">   histological stains for myelin and for elastic fibres. The former uses a solution of ferric chloride and haematoxylin that stains myelin sheaths deep blue and degenerated tissue a pale yellow; the latter uses a resorcin–fuchsin solution that stains elastic fibres blue–black.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5670">   <span class="italic">Carl Weigert (1845–1904), German histopathologist, Frankfurt-am-Main, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3205"><span class="bold">Werner’s syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5675">   a rare, autosomal recessive progeroid syndrome, characterized by the appearance of premature ageing.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5680">   <span class="italic">Carl Wilhelm Otto Werner (1879–1936), German physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3210"><span class="bold">Wernicke: frontomarginal sulcus of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5685">   frontomarginal sulcus in the cerebral cortex;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3215"><span class="bold">Wernicke’s speech area</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5690">   the motor speech area in the superior temporal lobe of the cerebral cortex;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3220"><span class="bold">Wernicke’s syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5695">   a syndrome characterized by mental and ocular disorders and ataxia. Mental disturbances include listlessness, disorientation, confusion, hallucinations, Korsakoff psychosis and other behavioural symptoms.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5700">   <span class="italic">Karl (or Carl) Wernicke (1848–1904), German physician, anatomist, psychiatrist and neuropathologist. Breslau, Poland, and then Halle, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3225"><span class="bold">Wharton’s: duct</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5705">   a duct of the submandibular salivary gland;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3230"><span class="bold">jelly</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5710">   a homogenous intercellular substance of the umbilical cord; gives a reaction for mucin and contains thin collagenous fibres that increase in number with fetal age.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5715">   <span class="italic">Thomas Wharton (1614–1673), physician and anatomist, St Thomas’s Hospital, London, UK. Remained on duty there during the Great Plague of 1665.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3235"><span class="bold">Whipple procedure</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5720">   pancreaticoduodenectomy.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5725">   <span class="italic">Allen Oldfather Whipple (1881–1963), American surgeon.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3240"><span class="bold">Whitnall: transverse ligament of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5730">   a ligament that originates from the trochlea and inserts into the lateral orbital wall, approximately 10<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm above Whitnall’s tubercle;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3245"><span class="bold">Whitnall’s tubercle</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5735">   a tubercle on the orbital surface of the zygomatic bone.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5740">   <span class="italic">Samuel Ernest Whitnall (1876–1950), Professor of Anatomy, successively at McGill University, Montreal, Canada, and Bristol, UK.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3250"><span class="bold">Wiebel–Palade bodies</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5745">   rod-shaped storage granules in endothelial cells.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5750">   <span class="italic">Euald Wiebel, Swiss physician; George Emil Palade (1912–2008), Romanian cytologist, Rockefeller Institute, New York, USA, awarded the Nobel Prize for Medicine or Physiology in 1974.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3255"><span class="bold">Williams–Campbell syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5755">   a rare form of congenital cystic bronchiectasis, in which distal bronchial cartilage is defective (Williams H, Campbell P 1960 Generalized bronchiectasis associated with deficiency of cartilage in the bronchial tree. Arch Dis Child 35:182–91).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5760">   <span class="italic">Howard Williams, twentieth-century Australian physician; Peter E Campbell, twentieth-century Australian physician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3260"><span class="bold">Willis, circle of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5765">   circulus arteriosus cerebri (cerebral arterial circle); the arterial anastomosis at the base of the brain.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5770">   <span class="italic">Thomas Willis (1621–1675), physician to King James II, practised first in Oxford, then London, UK.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3265"><span class="bold">Wilson’s pencils, pencil fibres of Wilson</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5775">   the striatopallidal fibres (Wilson SAK 1914 An experimental research into the anatomy and physiology of the corpus striatum. Brain 36:427–92).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5780">   <span class="italic">Samuel Kinnier Wilson (1878–1937), American-born British neurologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3270"><span class="bold">Winslow, foramen of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5785">   the epiploic foramen leading to the lesser sac.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5790">   <span class="italic">Jacob B Winslow (1669–1760), Professor of Anatomy and Surgery, Paris, France.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3275"><span class="bold">Wirsung, duct of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5795">   the main pancreatic duct.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5800">   <span class="italic">Johann Georg Wirsung (1589–1643), German physician, Prosector in Anatomy, Padua, Italy.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3280"><span class="bold">Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5805">   primary immunodeficiency resulting from an X-linked recessive mutation.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5810">   <span class="italic">Alfred Wiskott (1898–1978), German paediatrician; Robert Anderson Aldrich (1917–1998), American paediatrician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3285"><span class="bold">Wolffian: body</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5815">   the mesonephros;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3290"><span class="bold">duct</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5820">   the mesonephric duct.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5825">   <span class="italic">Caspar Wolff (1733–1794), born in Berlin, Professor of Anatomy, St Petersburg, Russia, one of the pioneers of embryology.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3295"><span class="bold">Wolff’s law</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5830">   states that changes in the stresses on bones are reflected in their internal structure.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5835">   <span class="italic">Julius Wolff (1836–1902), orthopaedic surgeon, Berlin, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3300"><span class="bold">Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5840">   bundle-branch block with short P–R interval in healthy young people prone to paroxysmal tachycardia.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5845">   <span class="italic">Louis Wolff (1898–1972), American cardiologist; John Parkinson (1885–1976), English cardiologist; Paul Dudley White (1886–1973), American cardiologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3305"><span class="bold">Wolfring, glands of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5850">   small tubuloalveolar glands in the subconjunctival tissue above the upper border of the tarsal plate.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5855">   <span class="italic">Emilij Franzevic von Wolfring (1832–1906), Polish ophthalmologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3310"><span class="bold">Wormian bones</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5860">   small bones that occasionally occur along the lambdoid suture of the human skull (synonym: sutural bones).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5865">   <span class="italic">Ole Worm (1588–1654), physician, Professor of Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3315"><span class="bold">Wright’s stain</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5870">   a mixture of eosin and methylene blue, used for demonstrating blood corpuscles and malarial parasites on histological sections or blood smears.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5875">   <span class="italic">James Homer Wright (1869–1928), pathologist, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3320"><span class="bold">Wrisberg, ligament of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5880">   a band attached to the posterior cruciate ligament of the knee.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5885">   <span class="italic">Heinrich August Wrisberg (1739–1808), Professor of Anatomy, Göttingen, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3325"><span class="bold">Yakovlev’s circuit</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5890">   one of the divisions of the limbic system, a circuit involving the orbitofrontal, insular and anterior temporal lobe cortex, the amygdala and the dorsomedial nucleus of the thalamus, involved in emotion, reward and social behaviour.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5895">   <span class="italic">Paul Ivan Yakovlev (1894–1983), Russian-born neurologist and neuropathologist who worked in the USA from 1925.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3330"><span class="bold">Young’s modulus</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5900">   sometimes called Young’s modulus of elasticity: a measure of the ability of a material to withstand changes in length when under lengthwise tension or compression.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5905">   <span class="italic">Thomas Young (1773–1829), British physician and physicist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3335"><span class="bold">Zeis, glands of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5910">   modified rudimentary sebaceous glands attached directly to the follicles of the eyelashes.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5915">   <span class="italic">Edward Zeis (1807–1868), German ophthalmologist.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3340"><span class="bold">Zellweger’s syndrome</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5920">   an inherited defect in peroxisome biogenesis and functioning.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5925">   <span class="italic">Hans Ulrich Zellweger (1909–1990), Swiss–American paediatrician.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3345"><span class="bold">Zencker’s diverticulum</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5930">   a posteromedial pulsion diverticulum through Killian’s dehiscence that causes debilitating dysphagia and regurgitation.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5935">   <span class="italic">Friedrich Albert von Zenker (1825–1898), German physician and pathologist.</span><span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E165" id="pagebreak_1.464E165"/><a id="pg1464e.163"/></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3350"><span class="bold">Zinn: anulus of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5940">   otherwise known as the common tendinous ring, it is a fibrous ring that surrounds the optic canal and part of the superior orbital fissure at the apex of the orbit and gives origin to the four recti;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3355"><span class="bold">circle of, zonula of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5945">   an (often incomplete) vascular circle within the sclera, formed by branches of the short posterior ciliary arteries, whose centripetal branches supply the laminar region of the optic nerve head (synonym: circle of <a href="#def1170">Haller,</a> zonula of Haller).</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5950">   <span class="italic">Johann Gottfried Zinn (1727–1759), Professor of Medicine and Director of Botanical Gardens, Göttingen, Germany.</span></div></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3360"><span class="bold">Zuckerkandl: fascia of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5955">   the fascia posterior or anterior to the kidney;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3365"><span class="bold">organ of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5960">   the para-aortic bodies (also known as paraganglia) are collections of neural crest-derived chromaffin tissue found in close relation to the abdominal aortic plexus;</span></div><div class="definition"><span class="def_term" id="def3370"><span class="bold">tuberculum of, tubercle of</span></span><span class="def_desc"></span><span id="p5965">   a projection of normal thyroid tissue from the posterior or lateral lobes of the thyroid gland.</span><div class="para_indented" id="p5970">   <span class="italic">Emil Zuckerkandl (1849–1910), Professor of Anatomy at Graz and then Vienna, Austria.</span></div></div></div><div><span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1464.e163" id="pagebreak_1464.e163"/></div><div class="para_indented" id="p5975">Many of the eponyms in this list are described in more detail in Firkin BG, Whitworth JA 2001 Dictionary of Medical Eponyms. London: Parthenon. A concise illustrated account of the derivation and individuals behind the more common eponyms associated with liver anatomy and surgery is provided in Stringer MD 2009 Eponyms in Surgery and Anatomy of the Liver, Bile Ducts and Pancreas. London: Royal Society of Medicine.</div></section></body></html>