<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html lang="EN" xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head><meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/><title>Gray's Anatomy</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../Style/Elsevier_eBook.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" media="only screen" href="../../Style/media.css"/></head><body><section role="doc-chapter" epub:type="chapter"><div id="CN"><a id="c0099"/></div><h1 class="chaptitle" epub:type="title" id="B9780702077050000999">Commentary I.2: Technical aspects and applications of diagnostic radiology</h1><address><div class="chapau" id="augrp0010">Jonathan Spratt</div></address><section><section><a id="s0010"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle0010">Magnetic Resonance Imaging</h2><div class="textfl" id="p0010">Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) produces images by first magnetizing a patient in the bore of a powerful magnet and then broadcasting short pulses of radiofrequency (RF) energy at 46.3<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>MHz that resonate mobile protons (hydrogen nuclei) in the fat, protein and water of the patient’s soft tissues and bone marrow. The protons produce RF echoes when their resonant energy is released; their density and location can be exactly correlated into an image matrix by complex mathematical algorithms.</div><div class="text" id="p0015">The spinning proton of the hydrogen nucleus acts like a tiny bar magnet, aligning either with or against the magnetic field, and producing a small net magnetic vector. RF energy from various types of coil, either built into the scanner or attached to specific body parts, generates a second magnetic field perpendicular to the static magnetic field that rotates or ‘flips’ the protons away from the static magnetic field. When the RF pulse is switched off, the protons flip back (relax) to their original position of equilibrium, emitting the RF energy they had acquired into the antenna around the patient. This information is then amplified, digitized and spatially encoded by the array processor.</div><div class="text" id="p0020">MRI systems are graded according to the strength of the magnetic field they produce. Routine high-field systems are those capable of producing a magnetic field strength of 3–7<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>T (Tesla), using a superconducting electromagnet immersed in liquid helium. Open magnets for claustrophobic patients and limb scanners use permanent magnets of 0.2–0.75<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>T. For comparison, Earth’s magnetic field varies from 30 to 60 μT. MRI does not present any recognized biological hazard. Patients who have any ferromagnetic intracranial aneurysm clips, certain types of cardiac valve replacement or intraocular metallic foreign bodies must never be examined because there is a high risk of death or blindness. Patients with implanted electronic devices such as a cardiac pacemaker or spinal cord stimulator must be screened carefully if MRI is being considered. Many new devices are now MRI-compatible, but the precise product details must be made available to the MRI team to ensure the patient’s safety (e.g. the need to induce a ‘scanner mode’ in the device, or establishing definitive MRI-incompatibility). Many extracranial vascular clips and orthopaedic prostheses are now ‘MRI-friendly’ but may cause local artefacts; newer sequences exist to reduce artefact. Loose metal items, ‘MR-unfriendly’ anaesthetic equipment and credit cards must be excluded from the examination room. Pillows containing metallic coiled springs have been known nearly to suffocate patients, and heavy floor-buffing equipment has been found wedged in the magnet bore because domestic staff had been suboptimally informed.</div><div class="text" id="p0025">New methods of analysing normal and pathological brain anatomy are now at the forefront of research. These are MR spectroscopy (MRS); functional MRI (fMRI); diffusion tensor imaging (DTI); high angular resolution diffusion imaging (HARDI) for MR tractography (MRT, see below); and molecular MRI (mMRI), which has taken on a new direction since the description of the human genome.</div><div class="text" id="p0030">MRS assesses function within the living brain. It capitalizes on the fact that protons residing in differing chemical environments possess slightly different resonant properties (chemical shift). For a given volume of brain, the distribution of these proton resonances can be displayed as a spectrum. Discernible peaks can be seen for certain neurotransmitters: <span class="italic">N</span>-acetylaspartate varies in multiple sclerosis, stroke and schizophrenia while choline and lactate levels have been used to evaluate certain brain tumours.</div><div class="text" id="p0035">fMRI depends on the fact that haemoglobin is diamagnetic when oxygenated but paramagnetic when deoxygenated. These different signals can be weighted to the smaller vessels, and hence closer to the active neurones, by using larger magnetic fields. mMRI uses biomarkers that interact chemically with their surroundings and alter the image according to molecular changes occurring within the area of interest, potentially enabling early detection and treatment of disease and basic pharmaceutical development and quantitative testing.</div><div class="text" id="p0040">High-field-strength magnets give significant improvement in spatial resolution and contrast. MR images of the microvasculature of the live human brain that allow close comparison with the detail seen in histological slides have been acquired at 8<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>T. This has significant implications for the treatment of reperfusion injury and research into the physiology of solid tumours and angiogenesis. There is every reason to believe that continued efforts to push the envelope of high-field-strength applications will open new vistas in what appears to be a never-ending array of potential clinical applications.</div><div class="text" id="p0045">T1-weighted images best accentuate fat and other soft tissues, whereas fluid is low-signal; these images are nicknamed the ‘anatomy weighting’ amongst radiologists who publish or teach anatomy. T2-weighted images reveal fluid as high signal as well as fat. Fat suppression sequences using T2 ‘fat sat’ (T2FS) or short tau inversion recovery (STIR) are very sensitive in highlighting the soft tissue or bone marrow oedema that almost invariably accompanies pathological states such as inflammation or tumours. Contrast-enhanced images with gadolinium, when used with T1 fat saturation (T1FS) sequences, also exquisitely highlight hypervascularity, particularly that associated with tumours and inflammation, especially in pathologies where the blood–brain barrier is compromised. Metallic artefact reduction sequences (MARS) are superior in imaging periprosthetic soft tissues after joint replacement or other orthopaedic metalwork implantation.</div><section><a id="s0015"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle0015">MR tractography</h3><div class="textfl" id="p0050">MR tractography (MRT) is a three-dimensional modelling technique used to represent neural tracts visually using data collected by DTI or, more recently, by HARDI, with results presented in two- and three-dimensional images (<a href="#bib3" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_3">Nucifora et al 2007</a>) (see <a href="../B978070207705000032X/B978070207705000032X.xhtml">Chapter 32</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0060">The MRI sequences used look at the symmetry of water diffusion in the brain. Bundles of fibre tracts make the water diffuse asymmetrically in a ‘tensor’, the major axis parallel to the direction of the fibres. There is a direct relationship between the number of fibres and the degree of anisotropy. DTI assumes that the direction of least restriction corresponds to the direction of white matter tracts. Diffusion MRI was introduced in 1985. In the more recent evolution of the technique into diffusion tensor MRI (DTI), the relative mobility of the water molecules from the origin is modelled as an ellipsoid rather than a sphere. This allows full characterization of molecular diffusion in the three dimensions of space and the formation of tractograms. Barriers cause uneven anisotropic diffusion. In white matter, the principal barrier is the myelin sheath, whereas bundles of axons provide a barrier to perpendicular diffusion and a path for parallel diffusion along the orientation of the fibres. Anisotropic diffusion is expected to be increased overall in areas of high mature axonal order. Conditions where barriers offered by the myelin sheaths or the axons are disrupted, e.g. in trauma, tumours and inflammation, reduce anisotropy and yield DTI data used to seed various tractographic assessments of the brain. Data sets may be rotated continuously into various planes in order to appreciate the structure better; colour may be assigned based on the dominant direction of the fibres. A leading clinical application of MRT is in the presurgical mapping of eloquent regions. Intraoperative electrical stimulation (IES) provides a clinical gold standard for the existence of functional motor pathways that can be used to determine the accuracy and sensitivity of fibre-tracking algorithms.</div><div class="text" id="p0065">Intersecting tracts or partial volume averaging of adjacent pathways with different fibre orientations are the reasons why DTI does not accurately describe the microstructure in complex white matter voxels that contain more than one fibre population, e.g. in the centrum semiovale, where major white matter tracts such as the pyramidal tract, the superior longitudinal fasciculus and the corpus callosum intersect. This has hindered preoperative mapping of the pyramidal tract in brain tumour patients. HARDI permits more accurate delineation of pathways within<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E135" id="pagebreak_1.464E135"/> complex regions of white matter. The q-ball reconstruction of HARDI data provides an orientation distribution function (ODF) that can be used to determine the orientations of multiple fibre populations contributing to a voxel’s diffusion MR signal, mapping fibre trajectories through regions of complex tissue architecture in a clinically feasible timeframe.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0020"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle0020">Ultrasound</h2><div class="textfl" id="p0070">Uniquely, ultrasound images do not depend on the use of electromagnetic wave forms. The properties of high-frequency sound waves (longitudinal waves) and their interaction with biological tissues are responsible for the production of ‘echograms’ (<a href="#bib1" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_1">Desser and Jeffrey 2001</a>). A sound wave of appropriate frequency (diagnostic range 3.5–20<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span> MHz) is produced by piezo-electric principles. Image production is determined by attenuation and reflection as the beam passes through tissues. Attenuation is caused by the loss of energy due to absorption, reflection and refraction in soft tissues, resulting in a reduction in signal intensity. Reflection of sound waves within the range of the receiver produces the image, and the echotexture is dependent on tiny differences in acoustic impedance between different tissues. Blood flow and velocity can be measured (using the Doppler principle) in duplex mode.</div><div class="text" id="p0075">Techniques such as harmonic imaging and the use of ultrasound contrast agents (stabilized microbubbles) have enabled non-invasive determination of myocardial perfusion. These contrast agents also clearly improve the detection of metastases in the liver and spleen. Ultrasound is the most common medical imaging technique for producing elastograms, in which stiffness or strain images of soft tissue are used to detect or classify tumours. Cancer is 5–28 times stiffer than the background of normal soft tissue; when a mechanical compression or vibration is applied, a tumour deforms less than the surrounding tissue. Elastography may be used, for example, to measure the stiffness of the liver <span class="italic">in vivo</span> or in the detection of breast or thyroid tumours. A correlation between liver elasticity and the cirrhosis score has been shown (<a href="#bib4" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_4">Yeh et al 2002</a>, <a href="#bib2" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_2">Foucher et al 2006</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0080">Interpretation of anatomy and pathology from static ultrasound images is more difficult than that from other imaging modalities: compare the real-time nature ultrasound in Video 23.1 with the static images in <a href="../B9780702077050000239/B9780702077050000239.xhtml#f0030">Fig. 23.5</a>. The technique is highly operator-dependent and provides unique information on tissue structure and form not obtained from other imaging techniques.</div></section><section><a id="s0025"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle0025">Nuclear Medicine</h2><div class="textfl" id="p0085">Historically, the field of nuclear medicine began in 1946 when radioactive iodine was administered as an ‘atomic cocktail’ to treat thyroid cancer. Since that time, nuclear medicine has advanced to the point where it was recognized in the early 1970s as a diagnostic subspecialty.</div><div class="text" id="p0090">Unlike diagnostic radiology, where an image is created by passing energy through the body from an external source, nuclear medicine creates an image by measuring the radiation emitted from tracers taken internally. Overall, the radiation dosages are comparable with CT and vary depending on the examination. Nuclear medicine also differs from most other imaging modalities in that the tests demonstrate the physiological function of a specific area of the body. In some instances, this physiological information may be fused with the more anatomical imaging of CT or MRI, combining the strengths of anatomy and function for diagnosis (e.g. <a href="#bib50" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_50">Dewey et al 2020</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0095">Nuclear medicine uses pharmaceuticals that have been labelled with a radionuclide (radiopharmaceuticals) and which are administered to patients by intravenous injection, ingestion or inhalation (the method of administration depends on the type of examination and the organ or organ process to be imaged). Emitted radiation is detected and imaged with specialized equipment such as gamma cameras, positron emission tomography (PET) or single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT). Radiation may be measured from parts of the body by the use of probes, or samples may be taken from patients and measured in counters.</div><div class="text" id="p0100">Radiopharmaceuticals may be used to image a disease process or to treat diseases. Those used for imaging emit a gamma ray (γ) and those used for treatment emit a beta (β) particle. Gamma rays are of higher energy in order to pass through the body and be detected by a detection camera, whereas β particles travel only short distances and emit their radiation dose to the target organ. For example, <sup>99m</sup>technetium or <sup>123</sup>iodine may be used to detect thyroid disease, but certain thyroid diseases or thyroid cancer may be treated solely or in part with <sup>131</sup>iodine. The difference in the agent used depends on the type and energy levels of the radiation particle that the radioisotope emits.</div><div class="text" id="p0105">Radionuclides used in nuclear medicine are often chemically bound to a complex called a tracer. The way the body handles a tracer may differ in disease or pathological processes. For example, the tracer used in bone imaging is methylene-diphosphonate (MDP) bound to <sup>99m</sup>technetium. MDP attaches to hydroxyapatite in bone; altered bone physiology, such as occurs in a fracture, metastatic bone disease or arthritic change, produces an increase in biochemical bone activity and an accumulation of MDP that is seen as a focal ‘hot spot’ of the radiopharmaceutical on a bone scan.</div><div class="text" id="p0110"><sup>99m</sup>Technetium is the major workhorse radioisotope of nuclear medicine. It can be eluted from a molybdenum/technetium generator stored within a nuclear medicine department, allowing for easy access. It has a short half-life (6 hours), which allows for ease of medical imaging and disposal. Its pharmacological properties allow it to be easily bound to various tracers and it emits gamma rays that are of suitable energy for medical imaging. In addition to <sup>99m</sup>technetium, the most common intravenous radionuclides used in nuclear medicine are <sup>123</sup>iodine and <sup>131</sup>iodine, <sup>201</sup>thallium, <sup>67</sup>gallium, <sup>18</sup>fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) and <sup>111</sup>indium-labelled leukocytes. The most common gaseous/aerosol radionuclides used are <sup>133</sup>xenon, <sup>81m</sup>krypton, <sup>99m</sup>technetium (Technegas) and <sup>99m</sup>technetium diethylene triamine pentaacetic acid (DTPA).</div><div class="text" id="p0115">The images obtained from nuclear medicine imaging can be single or multiple. Image sets may be represented by time sequence imaging (e.g. cine), such as dynamic imaging or cardiac gated sequences, or by spatial sequence imaging, where the gamma camera is moved relative to the patient, e.g. in SPECT imaging. Spatial sequence imaging allows the images to be presented as a slice-stack much in the way that CT or MRI images are displayed. It may also be fused with concomitant CT or MRI to provide combined physiological and anatomical imaging.</div><div class="text" id="p0120">A PET scan is a specialized type of nuclear medicine imaging that measures important body functions, such as blood flow, oxygen use or glucose metabolism. It involves short-lived radioactive tracer isotopes that emit positrons (positively charged subatomic particles with the same mass and magnitude of charge as electrons). The radioisotopes are chemically incorporated into biologically active molecules: most commonly, the sugar FDG (2-deoxy-2-[fluorine-18]fluoro-D-glucose). An hour after injection, FDG becomes concentrated into the tissues of interest; images are obtained as the isotope undergoes positron emission decay. A positron travels only a few millimetres before reacting with an electron by annihilation, producing a pair of gamma photons that move in opposite directions. The PET scan detectors process only those photon pairs that are detected simultaneously (coincident detection) to create an image of tissue activity with respect to that particular isotope. These images may subsequently be fused with CT or MR images. The short half-life of the isotopes limits PET imaging; close access to a cyclotron for generation of the isotopes plays an important role in the feasible location of a PET scanner. Typical isotopes used in medical imaging and their half-lives are: <sup>11</sup>carbon (about 20 min), <sup>13</sup>nitrogen (about 10 min), <sup>13</sup>oxygen (about 2 min) and <sup>18</sup>fluorine (about 110 min).</div></section><section><a id="s0030"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle0030">Angiography/Interventional Radiology</h2><div class="textfl" id="p0125">Angiographic imaging was first described in 1927, when Egas Moniz, a physician and neurologist, introduced contrast X-ray cerebral angiography. (Moniz was awarded the Nobel Prize for his work in 1949.) In 1953, the field was revolutionized by the Seldinger technique, in which no sharp needles remained inside the vascular lumen during imaging. Although angiography initially involved X-ray and fluoroscopic imaging of blood vessels and organs of the body after injecting radiopaque contrast agents into the blood stream, it has evolved to encompass so much more. Many of the procedures currently performed by angiography may be diagnostic; following the advent of minimally invasive procedures performed with image guidance, the name of the discipline changed to interventional radiology (or vascular and interventional radiology).</div><div class="text" id="p0130">Angiograms are typically performed by gaining access to the blood vessels, through either the femoral artery, femoral vein or jugular vein, depending on the area of interest to be imaged (e.g. cerebral, coronary or pulmonary angiograms). Following vascular access, catheters are directed to the specific location to be imaged by the use of guidewires, and contrast agents are injected through these catheters to visualize the vessels or the organ with X-ray imaging. Imaging of the arterial and venous circulation of the arms and legs may demonstrate peripheral vascular disease.</div><div><span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1464.e134" id="pagebreak_1464.e134"/></div><div class="text" id="p0135">Treatment and/or interventions can often be performed through similar catheter-based examinations. Such procedures might involve angioplasties, where a balloon mechanism is placed across an area of narrowing (stenosis) in a vessel or lumen. With controlled inflation of the balloon, the area of narrowing can be widened.</div><div class="text" id="p0140">Imaging in diagnostic or interventional procedures may produce still or motion (cine) images. The technique often used, digital subtraction angiography (DSA), involves taking images at 2–30 frames per second to allow imaging of the flow of blood through vessels. A preliminary image of the area is taken before the contrast is injected; this ‘mask’ image is then electronically subtracted from all subsequent images, leaving only the vessels filled with contrast. For optimal subtraction, the patient must remain motionless.</div><div class="text" id="p0145">Angiograms of the heart may be performed to visualize the size and contractility of the chambers and the anatomy of the coronary vessels. The thorax may also be studied to evaluate the pulmonary arteries and veins for vascular malformations, blood clots and possible origins of haemoptysis. In the investigation of atherosclerotic disease, vascular malformations or tumoral vascularization, the neck is often imaged in order to visualize the vessels that supply the brain in their entirety, from the points at which they arise from the aortic arch to their termination as cerebral vessels. Renal artery imaging may elucidate the cause of hypertension in selected patients, and imaging of the mesenteric vessels may identify the origin of gastrointestinal bleeding or mesenteric angina.</div><div class="text" id="p0150">In addition to angiograms and venograms, the field of interventional radiology also includes such procedures as coil embolization of aneurysms and vascular malformations; balloon angioplasty and stent placement, even now for the endovascular repair of aortic aneurysms; chemoembolization directly into tumours; drainage catheter insertion; embolization (e.g. uterine artery for treatment of fibroids); thrombolysis to dissolve blood clots; tissue biopsy (percutaneous or transvascular); radiofrequency ablation and cryoablation of tumours; line insertions for specialized vascular access; inferior vena cava filter placements; vertebroplasty; nephrostomy placement; gastrostomy tube placement for feeding; dialysis access; transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) placement; biliary interventions; and, most recently, endovenous laser ablation of varicose veins.</div></section><section><a id="s0035"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle0035">Computed Tomography</h2><div class="textfl" id="p0155">The limitation of all plain radiographic techniques is the two-dimensional representation of three-dimensional structures; the linear attenuation coefficient of all the tissues in the path of the X-ray beam form the image. CT obtains a series of different angular X-ray projections that are processed by a computer to give a section of specified thickness. The CT image comprises a regular matrix of picture elements (pixels). All of the tissues contained within the pixel attenuate the X-ray projections and result in a mean attenuation value for the pixel. This value is compared with the attenuation value of water and is displayed on a scale (the Hounsfield scale). Water is said to have an attenuation of 0 Hounsfield units (HU); air typically has a HU number of <span>−</span>1000; fat is approximately <span>−</span>100 HU; soft tissues are in the range +20 to +70 HU; and bone is usually greater than +400 HU.</div><div class="text" id="p0160">Modern multislice helical CT scanners can obtain images in subsecond times, and imaging of the whole body from the top of the head to the thighs can take as little as a single breath-hold of only a few seconds. The fast scan times allow dynamic imaging of arteries and veins at different times after the injection of intravenous contrast agents. The continuous acquisition of data from a helical CT scanner allows reconstruction of an image in any plane (multiplane reconstruction, MPR), commonly sagittal and coronal, as may be seen in many of the images throughout this forty-second edition of <span class="italic">Gray’s Anatomy</span>. This orthogonal imaging greatly improves the understanding of the three-dimensional aspects of radiological anatomy and now forms part of the standard practice of assessing disease.</div><div class="text" id="p0165">No specific preparation is required for most CT examinations of the brain, spine or musculoskeletal system. Studies of the chest, abdomen and pelvis, and those of the brain with complex histories, usually require intravenous contrast medium that contains iodine because this defines vascular relationships and differentiates normal and pathological soft tissues more effectively. Opacification of the bowel in CT studies of the abdomen and pelvis may be accomplished by oral ingestion of a water-soluble contrast medium from 24 hours prior to the examination, in order to outline the colon, combined with further oral intake 0–60 minutes prior to the scan, in order to outline the stomach and small bowel. This procedure is much less frequently performed with the latest generation of scanners, which exquisitely differentiate various enhancing layers within the bowel wall. Occasionally, direct insertion of rectal contrast to show the distal large bowel may be required.</div><div class="text" id="p0170">Generally, most studies are performed with the patient supine with images obtained in the transverse or axial plane. Some CT scanners allow up to 25° of gantry angulation, which is particularly valuable in spinal imaging, but multidetector technology and the ability to reconstruct imaging in virtually any plane from the acquired 3D imaging block has obviated this need. Occasionally, direct coronal images are obtained in the investigation of cranial and maxillofacial abnormalities; in these cases, the patient lies prone with the neck extended and the gantry appropriately angled, but this technique has largely been superseded by the orthogonal imaging described above. The ability to acquire time-gated images at the same point in the cardiac cycle with multidetector scanners has also revolutionized ‘cold’ coronary artery assessment with the detail that is now achievable from these CT coronary angiograms.</div></section></section><footer><section role="doc-bibliography" epub:type="bibliography"><a id="cebib0010"/><h2 class="reftitle" id="s0040">References</h2><section role="doc-bibliography" epub:type="bibliography"><a id="cebibsec0010"/><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib1"><!--<a hreef="#bib_1">1</a>. --><a id="ref0010"/><a href="#bib_1">Desser</a> T.S, Jeffrey R.B. <cite>Tissue harmonic imaging techniques: physical principles and clinical applications</cite>. <cite><i>Semin Ultrasound CT MR</i></cite>. 2001;22:1–10.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib50"><!--<a hreef="#bib_50">50</a>. --><a id="ref0015"/><a href="#bib_50">Dewey</a> M, Siebes M, Kachelrieß M, et al. <cite>Clinical quantitative cardiac imaging for the assessment of myocardial ischaemia</cite>. <cite><i>Nature Rev Cardiol</i></cite>. 2020;17:427–450.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib2"><!--<a hreef="#bib_2">2</a>. --><a id="ref0020"/><a href="#bib_2">Foucher</a> J, Chanteloup E, Vergniol J, et al. <cite>Diagnosis of cirrhosis by transient elastography (FibroScan): a prospective study</cite>. <cite><i>Gut</i></cite>. 2006;55:403–408.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib3"><!--<a hreef="#bib_3">3</a>. --><a id="ref0025"/><a href="#bib_3">Nucifora</a> P.G, Verma R, Lee S.K, et al. <cite>Diffusion-tensor MR imaging and tractography: exploring brain microstructure and connectivity</cite>. <cite><i>Radiology</i></cite>. 2007;245:367–384.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib4"><!--<a hreef="#bib_4">4</a>. --><a id="ref0030"/><a href="#bib_4">Yeh</a> W.C, Li P.C, Jeng Y.M, et al. <cite>Elastic modulus measurements of human liver and correlation with pathology</cite>. <cite><i>Ultrasound Med Biol</i></cite>. 2002;28:467–474.</p></section></section></footer></section></body></html>