<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html lang="EN" xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head><meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/><title>Gray's Anatomy</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../Style/Elsevier_eBook.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" media="only screen" href="../../Style/media.css"/></head><body><section><a id="s1115"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0910">Lumbar arteries</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1530">There are usually four lumbar arteries on each side, in series with the posterior intercostal arteries. They arise from the posterolateral aspect of the abdominal aorta, opposite the lumbar vertebrae. A fifth, smaller, pair occasionally arises from the median sacral artery, but lumbar branches of the iliolumbar arteries often take their place. The lumbar arteries run posterolaterally on the first to the fourth lumbar vertebral bodies, passing behind the sympathetic trunk and tendinous arches formed by the attachments of psoas major to the vertebral bodies. The right lumbar arteries pass posterior to the inferior vena cava. The superior two right lumbar arteries and the first left lumbar artery lie behind the corresponding crus of the respiratory diaphragm. Just beyond the intervertebral foramina, each lumbar artery divides into a medial branch, which gives off spinal and ganglionic branches; a middle branch, from which dorsal and anastomotic branches arise; and a lateral branch, which supplies the abdominal wall (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib7" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_7">Arslan et al 2011</a>). Of particular importance is the spinal branch known as the great radicular artery (artery of Adamkiewicz), which frequently originates from an upper lumbar artery, particularly on the left side (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib31" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_31">Biglioli et al 2004</a>). Injury to this vessel, e.g. during thoracoabdominal aortic surgery, can cause spinal cord infarction.</div><div class="text" id="p1535">The lateral branch of each lumbar artery runs posterior to psoas major and the lumbar plexus, then across the anterior surface of quadratus lumborum, before piercing the posterior aspect of transversus abdominis to run forwards between it and internal abdominal oblique. Perforating branches pass posteriorly to supply the muscles and skin of the posterior abdominal wall (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib142" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_142">Kiil et al 2009</a>). The lumbar arteries anastomose with one another and the lower posterior intercostal, subcostal, iliolumbar, deep circumflex iliac and inferior epigastric arteries.</div><div class="text" id="p1540">The dorsal branch of each lumbar artery passes backwards between the adjacent transverse processes to supply the back muscles, vertebrae and their joints and the skin of the back.</div></section><section><a id="s1120"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0915">Median sacral artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1545">The median sacral artery is a small branch that usually arises from the posterior aspect of the aorta a little above its bifurcation. It descends close to the midline, anterior to the fourth and fifth lumbar vertebrae, sacrum and coccyx. At the level of the fifth lumbar vertebra it is crossed by the left common iliac vein and often gives off a small lumbar artery (arteriae lumbales imae), whose small branches reach the anus and rectum via the anococcygeal ligament. Anterior to the fifth lumbar vertebra, the median sacral artery anastomoses with a lumbar branch of the iliolumbar artery. Anterior to the sacrum, it anastomoses with the lateral sacral arteries and sends branches into the anterior sacral foramina.<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E82" id="pagebreak_1.464E82"></span><a id="pg1464.e80"/></div></section><section><a id="s9125"/><section><a id="s1125"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle0920">Common iliac arteries</h3><div class="textfl" id="p1550">The abdominal aorta bifurcates into the right and left common iliac arteries anterolateral to the left side of the body of the fourth lumbar vertebra (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib253" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_253">Roberts and Krishingner 1967</a>). These arteries diverge as they descend and they divide at the level of the sacro-iliac joint into external and internal iliac arteries. The anteroposterior diameters of the common, external and internal iliac arteries are strongly correlated to body surface area (BSA) in children, in contrast to adults, where the relation is inconsistent. Vessel diameters measured by ultrasonography are significantly larger in boys than in girls (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib200" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_200">Munk et al 2002</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p1555">Each common iliac artery also gives small branches to the peritoneum, psoas major, ureter, adjacent nerves and surrounding areolar tissue. The common iliac artery occasionally gives rise to the iliolumbar artery and accessory or replaced renal arteries if the kidney is low-lying.</div><section><a id="s1130"/><section><a id="s1135"/><section><a id="s1140"/><h4 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0925">Right common iliac artery</h4><div class="textfl" id="p1560">The right common iliac artery is approximately 5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm long. It passes obliquely across part of the bodies of the fourth and the fifth lumbar vertebrae, and is crossed anteriorly by the sympathetic rami to the pelvic plexus and, at its division into internal and external iliac arteries, by the ureter. It is covered by the parietal peritoneum, which separates it from the small intestine. Posteriorly, it is separated from the bodies of the fourth and fifth lumbar vertebrae and the intervening intervertebral disc by the right sympathetic trunk, the terminal parts of the common iliac veins and the start of the inferior vena cava, the obturator nerve, lumbosacral trunk and iliolumbar artery. Laterally, the inferior vena cava and the right common iliac vein lie superiorly and the right psoas major lies inferiorly. The left common iliac vein is medial to the proximal part of the right common iliac artery.</div></section><section><a id="s1145"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0930">Left common iliac artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1565">The left common iliac artery is shorter than the right and is approximately 4<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm long. Lying anteriorly are branches of the sympathetic trunk that contribute to the superior hypogastric plexus, the superior anorectal artery and, at its terminal bifurcation, the ureter. The sympathetic trunk, the bodies of the fourth and fifth lumbar vertebrae and the intervening intervertebral disc, the obturator nerve, lumbosacral trunk and iliolumbar artery are all posterior. The left common iliac vein is posteromedial and the left psoas major is lateral.</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s1150"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle0935">Internal iliac arteries</h3><div class="textfl" id="p1570">The internal iliac arteries provide the principal supply to the walls and viscera of the pelvis, the perineum and the gluteal region. Each internal iliac artery is approximately 4<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm long and begins at the common iliac bifurcation, level with the lumbosacral intervertebral disc and anterior to the sacroiliac joint (see <a href="../B9780702077050000719/B9780702077050000719.xhtml#f0075">Fig. 71.5</a>). It descends posteriorly to the superior margin of the greater sciatic foramen, where it divides into an anterior division, which continues in the same line towards the ischial spine, and a posterior division, which passes back to the greater sciatic foramen.</div><div class="text" id="p1575">The ureter and, in females, the ovary and distal end of the uterine tube, are anterior to the artery. The internal iliac vein, lumbosacral trunk and sacroiliac joint are posterior. Laterally are the external iliac vein, between the artery and psoas major, and the obturator nerve lying inferior to the vein. Medially, the parietal peritoneum and tributaries of the internal iliac vein separate the artery from the terminal ileum on the right and the sigmoid colon on the left. For details of the considerable variation in the anatomy of the internal iliac artery see <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib309" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_309">Tubbs et al (2016)</a>.</div><div class="text" id="p1580">In the fetus, the internal iliac artery is twice the size of the external iliac artery and is the direct continuation of the common iliac artery. The main trunk ascends on the anterior abdominal wall to the umbilicus, converging on the contralateral artery, and the two arteries run through the umbilicus to enter the umbilical cord as the umbilical arteries. At birth, when placental circulation ceases, only the pelvic segment remains patent as the internal iliac artery and part of the superior vesical artery and the remainder becomes a fibrous medial umbilical ligament. Persistence of the umbilical artery has been described and can cause extrinsic obstruction of the distal ureter (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib107" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_107">Gupta et al 1999</a>). In males, the patent part (commonly, the superior vesical artery) usually gives off the artery to the ductus deferens.</div><div class="text" id="p1585">The anterior division of the internal iliac arteries primarily supply the pelvic organs via the superior and inferior vesical, middle anorectal, vaginal, obturator, uterine, internal pudendal and inferior gluteal arteries (see <a href="../B9780702077050000719/B9780702077050000719.xhtml#f0075">Fig. 71.5</a>). It should be noted that there is significant variation in the branching patterns of the anterior division and therefore only the general principles will be considered here. The posterior division of the internal iliac arteries primarily supply muscles in the hip and back via the iliolumbar, lateral sacral and superior gluteal arteries.</div><section><a id="s1155"/><section><a id="s1160"/><section><a id="s1165"/><h4 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0940">Superior vesical artery</h4><div class="textfl" id="p1590">The superior vesical artery is the first large branch of the anterior division. It lies on the lateral wall of the pelvis, just inferior to the linea terminalis, and runs anteroinferiorly, medial to the periosteum of the posterior surface of the pubis. It supplies the distal end of the ureter, the fundus of the urinary bladder, the proximal end of the ductus deferens and the seminal glands. It also gives origin to the umbilical artery in the fetus, which remains as a fibrous cord – the medial umbilical ligament – in the adult. This vessel occasionally remains patent as a small artery supplying the umbilicus.</div><div class="text" id="p1595">The artery to the ductus deferens often originates from one of the branches of the superior vesical artery to the fundus of the urinary bladder: it accompanies the ductus deferens to the testis, where it anastomoses with the testicular artery.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s1170"/><section><a id="s1175"/><section><a id="s1180"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0945">Inferior vesical artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1600">The inferior vesical artery sometimes arises as a common branch with the middle anorectal artery from the internal iliac artery. In the male, it supplies the fundus of the urinary bladder, prostate, seminal glands and distal ureter and sometimes provides the artery to the ductus deferens. Branches to the prostate communicate across the midline. In the female it supplies the urinary bladder, and is often replaced by the vaginal artery (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib65" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_65">de Treigny et al 2017</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s1185"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0950">Middle anorectal artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1605">The middle anorectal artery runs into the lateral fascial coverings of the mesorectum. It often consists of multiple branches, can be small, and occasionally arises either close to or in common with the origin of the inferior vesical artery in males.</div></section><section><a id="s1190"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0955">Vaginal artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1610">In females, the vaginal artery sometimes replaces the inferior vesical artery. It can arise from the uterine artery close to its origin as either a single vessel or multiple branches.</div></section><section><a id="s1195"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0960">Obturator artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1615">The obturator artery arises from the anterior division of the internal iliac artery and runs anteroinferiorly on the lateral pelvic wall to the upper part of the obturator foramen. In the pelvis, it is related laterally to the obturator fascia and is crossed on its medial aspect by the ureter and, in the male, by the ductus deferens. The obturator nerve is superior to the artery, the obturator vein inferior to it. The obturator artery provides iliac branches to the iliac fossa that supply the underlying bone and iliacus and anastomose with the iliolumbar artery. It gives off a branch that runs medially to the urinary bladder and sometimes replaces the inferior vesical artery. In the female, the ovary lies medial to the obturator artery. A pubic branch usually arises just before the obturator artery leaves the pelvis and ascends over the pubis to anastomose with the contralateral artery and the pubic branch of the inferior epigastric artery.</div><div class="text" id="p1620">The obturator artery leaves the pelvis via the obturator canal. It divides into anterior and posterior branches that encircle the obturator foramen between obturator externus and the obturator membrane. The anterior branch curves anteriorly on the membrane and then inferiorly along its anterior margin to supply branches to obturator externus, pectineus, adductors longus, brevis and magnus and gracilis. It anastomoses with the posterior branch and the medial circumflex femoral artery. The posterior branch follows the posterior margin of the obturator foramen, turning anteriorly on the ischial part to anastomose with the anterior branch. It supplies the muscles attached to the ischial tuberosity and anastomoses with the inferior gluteal artery. An acetabular branch enters the hip joint at the acetabular notch, ramifies in the fat of the acetabular fossa and sends a branch along the ligament of the head of the femur.</div><div class="text" id="p1625">The obturator artery is occasionally replaced by an enlarged pubic branch of the inferior epigastric artery that descends almost vertically to the obturator foramen. It usually lies near the external iliac vein, lateral to the femoral ring, and is rarely injured during inguinal or femoral hernia surgery. It may curve along the edge of the lacunar ligament, partly encircling the neck of a hernia sac, and can be cut inadvertently during enlargement of the femoral ring in reducing a femoral hernia.</div></section><section><a id="s1200"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0965">Uterine artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1630">The uterine artery is large and it usually arises inferior to the obturator artery on the lateral wall of the pelvis, running inferomedially within the cardinal ligament. It may arise directly from the internal iliac artery, <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E83" id="pagebreak_1.464E83"/><a id="pg1464.e81"/>the superior gluteal artery, obturator artery or from a common trunk with the internal pudendal artery (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib52" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_52">Chantalat et al 2014</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p1635">From its origin, the uterine artery crosses the ureter anteriorly in the broad ligament before branching as it reaches the uterus at the level of the cervico-isthmic junction (see <a href="../B9780702077050000756/B9780702077050000756.xhtml#f0110">Fig. 75.21</a>). One major branch ascends the uterus tortuously within the broad ligament until it reaches the region of the hilum of the ovary, where it anastomoses with branches of the ovarian artery. Another branch descends to supply the cervix and anastomoses with branches of the vaginal artery to form two median longitudinal vessels, the azygos arteries of the vagina, which descend anterior and posterior to the vagina. Although there are anastomoses with the ovarian and vaginal arteries, the dominance of the uterine artery is indicated by its marked hypertrophy during pregnancy.</div><div class="text" id="p1640">The tortuosity of the vessels as they ascend in the broad ligaments is repeated in their branches within the uterine wall. Each uterine artery gives off numerous branches. These enter the uterine wall, divide and run circumferentially as groups of anterior and posterior arcuate arteries. They ramify and narrow as they approach the anterior and posterior midline so that no large vessels are present in these regions. However, the left and right arterial trees anastomose across the midline and unilateral ligation can be performed without serious effects. Terminal branches in the uterine muscle are tortuous and are called helicine arterioles. They provide a series of dense capillary plexuses in the myometrium and endometrium. From the arcuate arteries, many helical arteriolar rami pass into the endometrium. Their detailed appearance changes during the menstrual cycle. Helical arterioles are less prominent during the proliferative phase, whereas they grow in length and calibre, becoming even more tortuous, during the secretory phase.</div></section><section><a id="s1205"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0970">Internal pudendal artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1645">The internal pudendal artery is the smaller terminal branch of the anterior division of the internal iliac artery. Close to its origin it crosses anterior to piriformis, the sacral plexus and the inferior gluteal artery. It descends laterally to the inferior aspect of the greater sciatic foramen, where it leaves the pelvis between piriformis and ischiococcygeus and enters the gluteal region (see <a href="../B9780702077050000756/B9780702077050000756.xhtml#f0025">Fig. 75.4</a>). It next curves around the posterior aspect of the ischial spine and enters the ischio-anal fossa via the lesser sciatic foramen. This course effectively allows the nerve to wrap around the posterior limit of levator ani at its attachment to the ischial spine. Posterior to the ischial spine, the artery is covered by gluteus maximus, the pudendal nerve is medial, and the nerve to obturator internus is lateral. The artery passes through the ischio-anal fossa in the pudendal canal (Alcock’s canal) in the fascia covering obturator internus, giving off the inferior anorectal artery early in its course through the fossa (see <a href="../B9780702077050000719/B9780702077050000719.xhtml#f0050">Fig. 71.12</a>). It gives off several muscular branches in the pelvis and the gluteal region to supply adjacent muscles and nerves. The internal pudendal artery enters the perineum around the posterior aspect of the ischial spine and runs on the lateral wall of the ischio-anal fossa in the pudendal canal with the internal pudendal veins and the pudendal nerve. The canal lies about 4<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm superior to the inferior limit of the ischial tuberosity and is formed by connective tissue binding the internal pudendal vessels and pudendal nerve to the medial surface of the fascia covering obturator internus. As the artery approaches the margin of the ischial ramus, it proceeds superficial or deep to the perineal membrane, along the medial margin of the inferior pubic ramus, en route to its target structures.</div><div class="text" id="p1650">In the male, the internal pudendal artery distal to the perineal artery gives a branch to the bulb of the penis before it divides into the deep and dorsal arteries of the penis (see <a href="../B9780702077050000719/B9780702077050000719.xhtml#f0050">Fig. 71.12</a>). In the female, a similar branch of the internal pudendal artery is distributed to the corpus spongiosum and vagina. The deep arteries supply the corpora cavernosa of the clitoris; the dorsal arteries supply the glans and prepuce of the clitoris.</div><div class="text" id="p1655">Branches of the internal pudendal artery are sometimes derived from an accessory pudendal artery, which is usually a branch of the internal pudendal artery before its exit from the pelvis.</div><section><a id="s1225"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0990">Inferior anorectal artery</p><div class="textfl" id="p1685">The inferior anorectal artery is a terminal branch of the internal pudendal artery and supplies the internal and external anal sphincters, the anal canal and perianal skin. It arises just after the internal pudendal artery enters the pudendal canal on the lateral wall of the ischio-anal fossa and runs anteromedially through the adipose tissue of the fossa to enter the proximal anal canal laterally. Ascending branches supply the distal third of the rectum, anastomosing with terminal branches of the superior anorectal artery in the rectal submucosa to reach the external anal sphincter: the artery often branches before reaching the sphincter. During dissections of the anal canal, particularly during perineal excisions of the anus or rectum, the inferior anorectal vessels are encountered in the ischio-anal fossa and must be ligated before division, otherwise they tend to retract laterally, where they can cause troublesome bleeding.</div></section><section><a id="s1230"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0995">Perineal artery</p><div class="textfl" id="p1690">The perineal artery is a branch of the internal pudendal artery that arises near the anterior end of the pudendal canal and runs through the perineal membrane. In the male, it approaches the scrotum in the superficial perineal space, between bulbospongiosus and ischiocavernosus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000744/B9780702077050000744.xhtml#f0095">Fig. 74.24</a>). A small transverse branch passes medially, inferior to the superficial transverse perineal muscle, to anastomose with the contralateral artery and with the posterior scrotal and inferior anorectal arteries. It supplies the transverse perinei, the perineal body and the posterior attachment of the bulb of the penis. The posterior scrotal arteries are usually terminal branches of the perineal artery but can also arise from its transverse branch. They are distributed to the scrotal skin and dartos in the male and supply the perineal muscles. In the female, the perineal artery runs an almost identical course to that in the male and gives off posterior labial branches (see <a href="../B9780702077050000756/B9780702077050000756.xhtml#f0025">Fig. 75.4</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s1210"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0975">Artery to the bulb of the penis</p><div class="textfl" id="p1660">The artery to the bulb of the penis penetrates the perineal membrane to enter the corpus spongiosum from above its posterolateral border and supplies the bulb of the penis and the urethra, in addition to the corpus spongiosum and glans penis.</div></section><section><a id="s1215"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0980">Dorsal artery of the penis</p><div class="textfl" id="p1665">The dorsal artery of the penis passes between the crus of the penis and the pubis to reach the dorsal surface of the corpus cavernosum. It runs alongside the deep dorsal vein of the penis and the dorsal nerve of the penis and is attached, together with these structures, to the underside of the deep fascia of the penis. As it courses to the glans penis it gives off circumferential branches to the corpus spongiosum and spongy urethra. The rich blood supply to the corpus spongiosum allows the urethra to be divided safely during stricture repair.</div></section><section><a id="s1220"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0985">Deep artery of the penis</p><div class="textfl" id="p1670">The deep artery of the penis is often a paired vessel that pierces the tunica albuginea of the corpora cavernosa proximally and then travels near the centre of the corporal bodies in the direction of the glans penis. Along its course it gives off several straight and helicine branches at regular intervals; they open directly into the cavernous spaces of the corporal bodies.</div><div class="text" id="p1675">Variations in penile vascular anatomy are common and can include a single or absent cavernous artery or the presence of accessory pudendal arteries (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib14" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_14">Bare et al 1994</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib181" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_181">Matin 2006</a>). While the penile arterial supply is commonly derived from both accessory and internal pudendal arteries, it can be derived exclusively from either the internal pudendal arteries or the accessory pudendal arteries (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib82" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_82">Droupy et al 1997</a>). Recognizing such variation is extremely important for any surgeon contemplating penile revascularization surgery.</div><div class="text" id="p1680">The artery to the bulb of the penis supplies the corpus spongiosum, and the deep artery of the penis supplies the corpus cavernosum on each side. The dorsal artery runs on the dorsal aspect of the penis and supplies circumflex branches to the corpora cavernosa and corpus spongiosum that end by anastomosing near the corona of the glans and supplying the glans and prepuce of the penis.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1235"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1000">Inferior gluteal artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1695">The inferior gluteal artery is the larger terminal branch of the anterior division of the internal iliac artery. It descends posteriorly, anterior to the sacral plexus and piriformis but posterior to the internal pudendal artery. It passes between either the first and second, or the second and third, sacral ventral rami, then between piriformis and ischiococcygeus, before running through the inferior aspect of the greater sciatic foramen to reach the gluteal region. It next runs inferiorly with the sciatic and posterior femoral cutaneous nerves, deep to gluteus maximus and between the greater trochanter and ischial tuberosity, and continues down the thigh, supplying the skin and anastomosing with branches of the perforating arteries. The inferior gluteal and internal pudendal arteries often arise as a common stem from the internal iliac artery, sometimes with the superior gluteal artery. In the pelvis, the inferior gluteal artery gives branches to piriformis, ischiococcygeus and iliococcygeus, and occasionally gives rise to the middle anorectal artery. It can supply vessels to the seminal glands and prostate.</div></section><section><a id="s1240"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1005">Arteria comitans nervi ischiadici (artery to sciatic nerve)</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1700">The arteria comitans nervi ischiadici is a direct or indirect branch of the internal iliac artery, and runs on the surface of, or within, the sciatic <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E84" id="pagebreak_1.464E84"/><a id="pg1464.e82"/>nerve. It represents the primitive axial artery of the lower limb. The artery is usually a very small vessel; occasionally, it persists as a large vessel, in which case the femoral artery is correspondingly reduced in size. The artery may participate in collateral circulatory pathways.</div></section><section><a id="s1245"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1010">Iliolumbar artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1705">The iliolumbar artery is the first branch of the posterior division of the internal iliac artery and ascends laterally anterior to the sacro-iliac joint and lumbosacral trunk. It lies posterior to the obturator nerve and external iliac vessels, and reaches the medial border of psoas major, dividing behind it into the lumbar and iliac branches. The lumbar branch supplies psoas major and quadratus lumborum, and anastomoses with the fourth lumbar artery. It sends a small spinal branch through the intervertebral foramen between the fifth lumbar and first sacral vertebrae to supply radicular branches to the cauda equina. The iliac branch supplies iliacus; between the muscle and bone it anastomoses with the iliac branches of the obturator artery. A large nutrient branch enters an oblique canal in the ilium. Other branches run around the iliac crest, contribute to the supply of gluteal and abdominal muscles, and anastomose with the superior gluteal, circumflex iliac and lateral circumflex femoral arteries.</div></section><section><a id="s1250"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1015">Lateral sacral arteries</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1710">The lateral sacral arteries are usually double. If they are single, they soon divide into superior and inferior branches. The superior and larger branch passes medially into the first or second anterior sacral foramen, supplies the sacrum and contents of the sacral canal, and then leaves the sacrum via the corresponding dorsal foramen to supply the skin and muscles posterior to the sacrum. The inferior branch crosses obliquely anterior to piriformis and the sacral ventral rami, and then descends lateral to the sympathetic trunk to anastomose with its fellow and the median sacral artery anterior to the coccyx. Its branches enter the anterior sacral foramina and are distributed in the same way as the branches of the superior artery.</div></section><section><a id="s1255"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1020">Superior gluteal artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1715">The superior gluteal artery is the largest branch of the internal iliac artery and effectively forms the main continuation of its posterior division. It runs posteriorly between the lumbosacral trunk and the first sacral ventral ramus, or between the first and second sacral ventral rami, and then turns slightly inferiorly, leaving the pelvis via the greater sciatic foramen above piriformis and dividing into superficial and deep branches. In the pelvis, it supplies piriformis, obturator internus and a nutrient artery to the ilium. The superficial branch enters the deep surface of gluteus maximus. Its numerous branches supply the muscle and anastomose with the inferior gluteal branches (see <a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X_split_a.xhtml#f0150">Fig. 77.47</a>), while others perforate the tendinous medial attachment of the muscle to supply the skin over the sacrum, where they anastomose with the posterior branches of the lateral sacral arteries. The deep branch of the superior gluteal artery passes between gluteus medius and the ilium, soon dividing into superior and inferior branches. The superior branch skirts the superior border of gluteus minimus to the anterior superior iliac spine and anastomoses with the deep circumflex iliac artery and the ascending branch of the lateral circumflex femoral artery. The inferior branch runs through gluteus minimus obliquely, supplies it and gluteus medius, and anastomoses with the lateral circumflex femoral artery. A branch enters the trochanteric fossa to join the inferior gluteal artery and ascending branch of the medial circumflex femoral artery; other branches run through gluteus minimus to supply the hip joint.</div><div class="text" id="p1720">The superior gluteal artery occasionally arises directly from the internal iliac artery with the inferior gluteal artery and sometimes from the internal pudendal artery.</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s1260"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle1025">External iliac arteries</h3><div class="textfl" id="p1725">The external iliac arteries are the principal arteries of the lower limbs. They are larger than the internal iliac arteries (see <a href="../B9780702077050000719/B9780702077050000719.xhtml#f0075">Figs 71.5</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000719/B9780702077050000719.xhtml#f0085">71.6</a>). Each artery descends laterally along the medial border of psoas major, from the common iliac bifurcation to a point midway between the anterior superior iliac spine and the pubic symphysis, and enters the thigh posterior to the inguinal ligament to become the femoral artery.</div><div class="text" id="p1730">The parietal peritoneum and extraperitoneal tissue separate the right external iliac artery from the terminal ileum and, usually, the appendix, and the left external iliac artery from the sigmoid colon and coils of small intestine anteromedially. The external iliac artery can be crossed at its origin by the ureter and it is subsequently crossed by the gonadal vessels, the genital branch of the genitofemoral nerve, the deep circumflex iliac vein, and the ductus deferens or round ligament of the uterus. Posteriorly, the artery is separated from the medial border of psoas major by the iliac fascia. The external iliac vein lies partly posterior to its upper part but is more medial below. Laterally, it is related to psoas major, which is covered by the iliac and psoas fasciae. Numerous lymph vessels and nodes lie on its anterior and lateral aspects. The external iliac artery primarily supplies the lower limb and as such has few branches in the pelvis. It gives off very small vessels to psoas major and neighbouring lymph nodes, but has no other branches until it gives off the deep circumflex iliac and inferior epigastric arteries, near to where it passes deep to the inguinal ligament.</div><section><a id="s1265"/><section><a id="s1270"/><section><a id="s1275"/><h4 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1030">Deep circumflex iliac artery</h4><div class="textfl" id="p1735">The deep circumflex iliac artery branches laterally from the external iliac artery almost opposite the origin of the inferior epigastric artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000768/B9780702077050000768.xhtml#f0025">Fig. 76.4A</a>). It ascends and runs laterally to the anterior superior iliac spine deep to the inguinal ligament in a sheath formed by the union of the transversalis and iliac fasciae. There, it anastomoses with the ascending branch of the lateral circumflex femoral artery, pierces the transversalis fascia and skirts the inner lip of the iliac crest. About halfway along the iliac crest, it runs through transversus abdominis, and then between transversus abdominis and internal abdominal oblique, to anastomose with the iliolumbar and superior gluteal arteries. It gives off a large ascending branch at the anterior superior iliac spine that runs between internal abdominal oblique and transversus abdominis, supplies both muscles, and anastomoses with the lumbar and inferior epigastric arteries.</div></section><section><a id="s1280"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1035">Inferior epigastric artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1740">The inferior epigastric artery originates from the external iliac artery posterior to the inguinal ligament. It curves forwards in the anterior extraperitoneal tissue, ascends obliquely along the medial margin of the deep inguinal ring, and continues as an artery of the anterior abdominal wall.</div><div class="text" id="p1745">The inferior epigastric artery (often referred to as the deep inferior epigastric artery in clinical practice in order to distinguish it from the superficial (inferior) epigastric artery) originates from the medial aspect of the external iliac artery just proximal to where the vessels pass deep to the inguinal ligament (see <a href="../B9780702077050000604/B9780702077050000604.xhtml#f0080">Figs 60.1</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000604/B9780702077050000604.xhtml#f0090">60.3</a>). Its accompanying veins, usually two, unite to form a single vein that drains into the external iliac vein (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib261" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_261">Rozen et al 2009</a>). The vessel curves forwards in the extraperitoneal tissue and ascends obliquely along the medial margin of the deep inguinal ring. It lies posterior to the spermatic cord, separated from it by the transversalis fascia. It pierces the transversalis fascia and enters the posterior layer of the rectus sheath by passing anterior to the arcuate line. In this part of its course it is visible through the parietal peritoneum of the anterior abdominal wall and with this covering forms the lateral umbilical fold. Disruption of the artery by surgical incisions (e.g. insertion of laparoscopic ports, surgical tacks or abdominal drains) can cause a haematoma, which can expand to considerable size because there is no adjacent tissue against which the bleeding can be tamponaded.</div><div class="text" id="p1750">The ductus (vas) deferens in males or the round ligament of the uterus in females, pass medially after hooking around the inferior epigastric artery at the deep inguinal ring. The inferior epigastric vessels form the lateral border of the inguinal triangle (Hesselbach’s triangle). The boundaries of this anatomical region are seen during laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair: the inferior border of the triangle is formed by the iliopubic tract/inguinal ligament and the medial border by the lateral margin of rectus abdominis. Hernias occurring within the triangle are termed direct inguinal hernias.</div><div class="text" id="p1755">The inferior epigastric arteries ascend and anastomose with their superior counterparts as a single vessel in only about 30% of cases (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib86" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_86">El-Mrakby and Milner 2002</a>). Branching into two vessels before anastomosing is the most common pattern, accounting for almost 60%, with a trifurcation in the remainder. The inferior epigastric arteries have an average diameter of approximately 3<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm at their origin, compared to an average diameter of 1.6<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm at the origin of the superior epigastric arteries, presumably explaining why the inferior epigastric arteries provide the ‘dominant’ blood supply to rectus abdominis. Preliminary ligation of the inferior epigastric artery is often performed when preparing a myocutaneous flap from the mid or lower rectus abdominis based on the superior epigastric artery; this encourages augmentation of the superior epigastric arterial supply.</div><div class="text" id="p1760">Branches of the inferior epigastric artery anastomose with branches of the superior epigastric artery within rectus abdominis at a variable level proximal to the umbilicus (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib260" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_260">Rozen et al 2008</a>). Other branches anastomose with terminal branches of the distal five posterior intercostal, subcostal and lumbar arteries at the lateral border of the rectus sheath. Inferolaterally, branches anastomose with the deep circumflex <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E85" id="pagebreak_1.464E85"/><a id="pg1464.e83"/>iliac artery. The inferior epigastric artery also gives off the cremasteric artery, a pubic branch, and muscular and cutaneous branches.</div><section><a id="s1285"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1040">Cremasteric artery</p><div class="textfl" id="p1765">The cremasteric artery is a branch of the inferior epigastric artery. It accompanies the spermatic cord and supplies cremaster and other coverings of the cord and anastomoses with the testicular artery. Both the artery to the ductus deferens and the cremasteric artery enter the inguinal canal at the deep inguinal ring and travel the length of the spermatic cord alongside the testicular artery. The testicular artery and pampiniform plexus lie within the internal spermatic fascia, whereas the ductus deferens and its vessels, as well as cremaster and its vessels, lie outside the internal spermatic fascia but within the external spermatic fascia. In the scrotum, there is a rich vascular anastomosis at the head of the epididymis, between the testicular artery and the epididymal artery, and at the tail of the epididymis between the testicular, epididymal, and cremasteric arteries and the artery to the ductus deferens.</div><div class="text" id="p1770">In females, the homologous artery is small and accompanies the round ligament of the uterus.</div></section><section><a id="s1290"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1045">Pubic branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p1775">A pubic branch, near the femoral ring, descends posterior to the pubis and anastomoses with the pubic branch of the obturator artery. The pubic branch of the inferior epigastric artery can be larger than the obturator artery and supply most of the territory of the obturator artery in the thigh, in which case it is referred to as the aberrant obturator artery (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib222" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_222">Pai et al 2009</a>). It lies close to the medial border of the femoral ring and can be injured during medial dissection of the ring in femoral hernia repair, laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair, or with pelvic fractures.</div></section><section><a id="s1295"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1050">Muscular and cutaneous branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p1780">Muscular branches supply the abdominal muscles and peritoneum and anastomose with the circumflex iliac and lumbar arteries. Cutaneous branches arise within rectus abdominis, and perforate the aponeurosis of external abdominal oblique to supply the overlying skin; they anastomose with branches of the superficial epigastric artery, contributing to the ‘periumbilical perforator vessels’. These perforating vessels have been mapped in detail because they are particularly important in creating large lipocutaneous flaps on the abdominal wall: if this requires ligation of these vessels, the flap is at risk of necrosis (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib260" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Rozen et al 2008</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p1785">Occasionally the inferior epigastric artery arises from the femoral artery. It then ascends anterior to the femoral vein, passing deep to the inguinal ligament and into the abdominal cavity before following its usual abdominal course. Rarely it arises from the external iliac artery in common with an aberrant obturator artery or from the obturator artery itself.</div><div class="text" id="p1790">The superior and inferior epigastric arteries are important sources of collateral blood flow between the internal thoracic artery, the external iliac artery and the lumbar vessels when aortic blood flow is compromised. Additionally, small tributaries of the inferior epigastric vein draining the skin around the umbilicus anastomose with terminal branches of the umbilical vein that drain into the liver via the falciform ligament. These portosystemic communications can dilate substantially in patients with portal hypertension, resulting in portal venous blood draining into the systemic circulation via the inferior epigastric veins. Back pressure to the level of the skin leads to a pattern of dilated, serpiginous superficial veins radiating out from the umbilicus, referred to as the ‘caput medusae’.</div></section></section></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s1300"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle1055">Subclavian Artery and Arterial Supply of the Upper Limb</h2><div class="textfl" id="p1795">The stem artery of the upper limb is single as far as the elbow, but its name changes as it traverses different regions. From its origin to the outer border of the first rib it is the subclavian artery. From the outer border of the first rib to the tendon of teres major it is the axillary artery and from the tendon of teres major to its division at the elbow it is the brachial artery.</div><section><a id="s1305"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle1060">Subclavian artery</h3><div class="textfl" id="p1800">The right subclavian artery arises from the brachiocephalic trunk, the left from the aortic arch (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0075">Figs 35.14</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0095">35.18</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p1805">For description, each is divided into a first part, from its origin to the medial border of scalenus anterior; a second part posterior to scalenus anterior; and a third part from the lateral margin of scalenus anterior to the outer border of the first rib, where the subclavian artery becomes the axillary artery. The subclavian artery gives off the vertebral, internal thoracic, thyrocervical, costocervical and dorsal scapular arteries. On the left, all the branches except the dorsal scapular artery arise from the first part. On the right, the costocervical trunk usually arises from the second part. The suprascapular artery (usually a branch of the thyrocervical trunk) may arise from the third part of the subclavian artery.</div><div class="text" id="p1810">Each subclavian artery arches over the cervical pleura and pulmonary apex. The first parts differ on the right and left sides, whereas the second and third parts are almost identical.</div><section><a id="s1310"/><section><a id="s1315"/><h4 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1065">First part of right subclavian artery</h4><div class="textfl" id="p1815">The right subclavian artery arises from the brachiocephalic trunk either posterior to the right sternoclavicular joint or immediately superior to it (level with the body of the second thoracic vertebra or T1–T2 intervertebral disc (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib10" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_10">Badshah et al 2017</a>)) (see <a href="../B9780702077050000525/B9780702077050000525.xhtml#f0020">Fig. 52.3</a>). It ascends superolaterally to the level of the first rib, where it is located posterior to both the sternal end of the clavicle and scalenus anterior; it has a minimal intrathoracic presence. The vessel then passes inferolaterally across the superior surface of the first rib, and at the external border of the rib becomes the right axillary artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000483/B9780702077050000483.xhtml#f0025">Fig. 48.3</a>). It usually ascends 2<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm above the clavicle but this varies.</div><section><a id="s1320"/><section><a id="s1325"/><section><a id="s1330"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1070">Relations</p><div class="textfl" id="p1820">The artery is deep to the skin, superficial fascia, platysma, supraclavicular nerves, deep fascia, clavicular attachment of sternocleidomastoid, sternohyoid and sternothyroid. It is at first behind the origin of the right common carotid artery; more laterally, it is crossed by the vagus nerve, the cardiac branches of the vagus and the sympathetic trunk, and by internal jugular and vertebral veins; the subclavian sympathetic loop encircles it. The anterior jugular vein diverges laterally in front of it, separated by sternohyoid and sternothyroid. Below and behind the artery are the pleura and pulmonary apex; they are separated from the artery by the suprapleural membrane, the ansa subclavia, a small accessory vertebral vein and the right recurrent laryngeal nerve, which winds round the lower and posterior part of the vessel.</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s1335"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1075">First part of left subclavian artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1825">In the majority of individuals, the left subclavian artery originates independently from the aortic arch after the origins of the brachiocephalic and left common carotid arteries. It ascends into the neck posterior to scalenus anterior, then passes inferolaterally towards the external border of the first rib, where it becomes the left axillary artery. A common origin occasionally exists between the left subclavian and vertebral arteries. Bilateral brachiocephalic trunks are rare: they divide on both sides into common carotid and subclavian arteries.</div><section><a id="s1340"/><section><a id="s1345"/><section><a id="s1350"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1080">Relations</p><div class="textfl" id="p1830">In the thorax, the left subclavian artery is related anteriorly to the left common carotid artery and left brachiocephalic vein (and sometimes the inferior thyroid vein), from which it is separated by the left vagus, cardiac and phrenic nerves. Sternothyroid and sternohyoid lie between the vessel and the upper left aspect of the posterior surface of the manubrium sterni. On the left side of the oesophagus, the thoracic duct and longus colli are posterior. The left subclavian artery is in contact posterolaterally with the left lung and pleura. The trachea, left recurrent laryngeal nerve, oesophagus and thoracic duct are medial. Laterally, the artery grooves the mediastinal surface of the left lung and pleura, which also encroach on its anterior and posterior aspects. In the neck, near the medial border of scalenus anterior the artery is crossed anteriorly by the left phrenic nerve and the termination of the thoracic duct. Otherwise, anterior relations are the same as those of the first part of the right subclavian artery. Posteriorly and inferiorly, the relations of both vessels are identical but the left recurrent laryngeal nerve, medial to the left subclavian artery in the thorax, is not directly related to its cervical part.</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s1355"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1085">Second part of subclavian artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1835">The second part of the subclavian artery lies behind scalenus anterior; it is short and constitutes the highest part of the vessel (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0095">Fig. 35.18</a>).</div><section><a id="s1360"/><section><a id="s1365"/><section><a id="s1370"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1090">Relations</p><div class="textfl" id="p1840">The skin, superficial fascia, platysma, deep cervical fascia, sternocleidomastoid and scalenus anterior are anterior. The right phrenic nerve is often described as being separated from the second part of the subclavian artery by scalenus anterior, whereas it crosses the first part of the left subclavian artery. However, both nerves may sometimes lie anterior to the muscle. The suprapleural membrane, pleura and lung, and the lower trunk of the brachial plexus are posteroinferior; the upper and middle trunks of the plexus are superior; and the subclavian vein is anteroinferior, separated by scalenus anterior.<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E86" id="pagebreak_1.464E86"/><a id="pg1464.e84"/></div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s1375"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1095">Third part of subclavian artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1845">The third part of the subclavian artery descends laterally from the lateral margin of scalenus anterior to the outer border of the first rib, where it becomes the axillary artery. It is the most superficial part of the artery and lies partly in the supraclavicular triangle, where its pulsations may be felt and it may be compressed. The third part of the subclavian artery is the most accessible segment of the artery. Since the line of the posterior border of sternocleidomastoid approximates to the (deeper) lateral border of scalenus anterior, the artery can be felt in the anteroinferior angle of the posterior triangle. It can only be effectively compressed against the first rib: with the shoulder depressed, pressure is exerted down, back and medially in the angle between sternocleidomastoid and the clavicle. The palpable trunks of the brachial plexus may be injected with local anaesthetic allowing major surgical procedures to the arm.</div><section><a id="s1380"/><section><a id="s1385"/><section><a id="s1390"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1100">Relations</p><div class="textfl" id="p1850">The skin, superficial fascia, platysma, supraclavicular nerves and deep cervical fascia are anterior. The external jugular vein crosses its medial end and here receives the suprascapular, transverse cervical and anterior jugular veins, which collectively often form a venous plexus. The nerve to subclavius descends between the veins and the artery; the latter is terminally behind the clavicle and subclavius, where it is crossed by the suprascapular vessels. The subclavian vein is anteroinferior and the lower trunk of the brachial plexus is posteroinferior, between the subclavian artery and the scalenus medius (and on the first rib). The upper and middle trunks of the brachial plexus (which are palpable here) and the inferior belly of omohyoid are superolateral. The first rib is inferior.</div><div class="text" id="p1855">The right subclavian artery may arise above or below sternoclavicular level; it may be a separate aortic branch and be the first or last branch of the arch. When it is the first branch, it is in the position of a brachiocephalic trunk. When it is the last branch, it arises from the left end of the arch, and ascends obliquely to the right behind the trachea, oesophagus and right common carotid to the first rib. When this happens, the right recurrent laryngeal nerve hooks round the common carotid artery. Sometimes, when the right subclavian artery is the last aortic branch, it passes between the trachea and oesophagus and can cause dysphagia, a condition known as dysphagia lusoria. It may perforate scalenus anterior, and very rarely may pass anterior to it. Sometimes, the subclavian vein accompanies the artery behind scalenus anterior. The artery may ascend as high as 4<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm above the clavicle or it may reach only its upper border. The left subclavian artery is occasionally combined at its origin with the left common carotid artery.</div></section><section><a id="s1395"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1105">Branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p1860">The branches of the subclavian artery are the vertebral, internal thoracic, thyrocervical, costocervical and dorsal scapular arteries. On the left, all the branches except the dorsal scapular arise from the first part. On the right, the costocervical trunk usually arises from the second part. The suprascapular artery (usually a branch of the thyrocervical trunk) may arise from the third part of the subclavian artery.</div></section></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s1400"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle1110">Vertebral artery</h4><div class="textfl" id="p1865">The vertebral arteries and their major branches (sometimes referred to as the ‘vertebrobasilar system’) essentially supply blood to the upper spinal cord, the brainstem and cerebellum, and a significant but variable part of the posterior cerebral hemispheres (see <a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0025">Figs 26.4</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0030">26.5</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p1870">The vertebral artery arises from the superoposterior aspect of the first part of the subclavian artery. It passes through the foramina in the transverse processes of all of the cervical vertebrae except the seventh; occasionally, it may enter the cervical vertebral column via the fourth, fifth or seventh cervical vertebra (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0065">Fig. 35.12</a>). The artery curves medially behind the lateral mass of the atlas and enters the cranium via the foramen magnum (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0060">Fig. 35.11</a>). The right and left vertebral arteries converge medially as they ascend the medulla and unite to form the midline basilar artery at approximately the level of the junction between the medulla and pons.</div><section><a id="s1405"/><section><a id="s1410"/><section><a id="s1415"/><section><a id="s1420"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1115">Relations</p><div class="textfl" id="p1875">The first part, V1, passes back and upwards between longus colli and scalenus anterior, behind the common carotid artery and the vertebral vein. It is crossed by the inferior thyroid artery, and by the thoracic duct on the left side and the right lymphatic duct on the right side. The seventh cervical transverse process, the inferior cervical ganglion and ventral rami of the seventh and eighth cervical spinal nerves lie posterior to the artery. The second part, V2, ascends through the transverse foramina of the remaining cervical vertebrae, accompanied by a large branch from the inferior cervical ganglion and a plexus of veins that form the vertebral vein low in the neck. It lies anterior to the ventral rami of the cervical spinal nerves (C2–C6) and ascends almost vertically to pass through the transverse process of the axis, where it turns laterally to gain access to the transverse foramen of the atlas (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0060">Fig. 35.11</a>). The third part, V3, issues medial to rectus capitis lateralis, and curves backwards and medially behind the lateral mass of the atlas, with the first cervical ventral spinal ramus lying on its medial side. In this position, it lies in a groove on the upper surface of the posterior arch of the atlas, and it enters the vertebral canal below the inferior border of the posterior atlanto-occipital membrane. This part of the artery, covered by semispinalis capitis, lies in the suboccipital triangle. The first cervical dorsal spinal ramus separates the artery from the posterior arch. The fourth part, V4, pierces the dura and arachnoid mater, and ascends anterior to the hypoglossal roots. It inclines anterior to the medulla oblongata and unites with its contralateral fellow to form the midline basilar artery at the lower border of the pons.</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s1425"/><hgroup><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1120">Cervical branches of the vertebral artery</h5><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1125">Spinal branches</h6></hgroup><section><a id="s1430"/><div class="textfl" id="p1880">The spinal branches enter the vertebral canal via the intervertebral foramina and supply the spinal cord and its membranes. They fork into ascending and descending rami, which unite with those above and below, to form two lateral anastomotic chains on the posterior surfaces of the vertebral bodies near the attachment of their pedicles. Branches from these chains supply the periosteum and vertebral bodies, and others communicate with similar branches across the midline; from these connections small rami join similar ones above and below, to form a median anastomotic chain on the posterior surfaces of the vertebral bodies.</div></section><section><a id="s1435"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1130">Muscular branches</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1885">Muscular branches arise from the vertebral artery as it curves round the lateral mass of the atlas. They supply the deep muscles of the suboccipital region and anastomose with the occipital, ascending and deep cervical arteries.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1440"/><hgroup><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1135">Cranial branches of the vertebral artery</h5><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1140">Meningeal branches</h6></hgroup><section><a id="s1445"/><div class="textfl" id="p1890">One or two meningeal branches arise from the vertebral artery near the foramen magnum and ramify between the bone and dura mater in the posterior cranial fossa. They supply bone, diploë and the falx cerebelli.</div></section><section><a id="s1450"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1145">Posterior spinal artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1895">A posterior spinal artery usually arises from the posterior inferior cerebellar artery, but may originate directly from the vertebral artery near the medulla oblongata. It passes posteriorly and descends as two branches that lie anterior and posterior to the dorsal roots of the spinal nerves. These are reinforced by spinal twigs from the vertebral, ascending cervical, posterior intercostal and first lumbar arteries, all of which reach the vertebral canal by the intervertebral foramina, and sustain the posterior spinal arteries to the lower spinal levels.</div></section><section><a id="s1455"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1150">Anterior spinal artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1900">A small anterior spinal artery arises near the end of the vertebral artery, and descends anterior to the medulla oblongata to unite with its contralateral fellow at mid-medullary level. The single trunk then descends on the ventral midline of the spinal cord, and is reinforced sequentially by small spinal rami from the vertebral, ascending cervical, posterior intercostal and first lumbar arteries, which all enter the vertebral canal via intervertebral foramina. Branches from the anterior spinal arteries and the beginning of their common trunk are distributed to the medulla oblongata. Minute medullary arteries are distributed widely to the medulla oblongata.</div></section><section><a id="s1460"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1155">Posterior inferior cerebellar artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1905">The largest branch of the vertebral artery (although sometimes absent), the posterior inferior cerebellar artery arises near the lower end of the olive and then ascends behind the roots of the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves to reach the inferior border of the pons. Here it curves and descends along the inferolateral border of the fourth ventricle before it turns laterally into the cerebellar vallecula between the hemispheres, and divides into medial and lateral branches. The medial branch runs back between the cerebellar hemisphere and inferior vermis, and supplies both. The lateral branch supplies the inferior cerebellar surface as far as its lateral border and anastomoses with the anterior inferior and superior cerebellar arteries (from the basilar artery). The trunk of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery supplies the medulla oblongata dorsal to the olivary nucleus and lateral to the hypoglossal nucleus and its emerging nerve roots. It also supplies the choroid plexus of the fourth ventricle and sends a branch lateral to the cerebellar tonsil to supply the dentate nucleus.<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E87" id="pagebreak_1.464E87"/><a id="pg1464.e85"/></div></section></section></section><section><a id="s1465"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle1160">Basilar artery</h4><div class="textfl" id="p1910">The basilar artery is a large median vessel formed by the union of the vertebral arteries at the junction of the medulla and pons (see <a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0020">Figs 26.3</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0030">26.5</a>). It lies in the pontine cistern, and follows a shallow median groove on the ventral pontine surface, extending to the upper border of the pons. It ends by dividing into two posterior cerebral arteries at a variable level behind the dorsum sellae, usually in the interpeduncular cistern.</div><section><a id="s9470"/><section><a id="s1470"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1165">Pontine branches</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1915">Numerous small pontine branches arise from the front and sides of the basilar artery along its course and supply the pons.</div></section><section><a id="s1475"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1170">Labyrinthine artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1920">The long and slender labyrinthine (internal auditory) artery has a variable origin. It usually arises from the anterior inferior cerebellar artery, but variations in its origin include the lower part of the basilar artery, the superior cerebellar artery or, occasionally, the posterior inferior cerebellar artery. The labyrinthine artery accompanies the facial and vestibulocochlear nerves into the internal acoustic meatus and is distributed to the internal ear.</div></section><section><a id="s1480"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1175">Anterior inferior cerebellar artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1925">The anterior inferior cerebellar artery is given off from the lower part of the basilar artery and runs posterolaterally, usually ventral to the abducens, facial and vestibulocochlear nerves. It commonly exhibits a loop into the internal acoustic meatus below the nerves, and when this occurs, the labyrinthine artery may arise from the loop. The anterior inferior cerebellar artery supplies the inferior cerebellar surface anterolaterally and anastomoses with the posterior inferior cerebellar branch of the vertebral artery. A few branches supply the inferolateral parts of the pons and occasionally also supply the upper medulla oblongata.</div></section><section><a id="s1485"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1180">Superior cerebellar artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1930">The superior cerebellar artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0020">Figs 26.3</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0030">26.5</a>) arises near the distal portion of the basilar artery, immediately before the formation of the posterior cerebral arteries. It passes laterally below the oculomotor nerve, which separates it from the posterior cerebral artery, and curves round the cerebral peduncle below the trochlear nerve to gain the superior cerebellar surface. Here it divides into branches that ramify in the pia mater and supply this aspect of the cerebellum, and also anastomose with branches of the inferior cerebellar arteries. The superior cerebellar artery supplies the pons, pineal body, superior medullary velum and tela choroidea of the third ventricle.</div></section><section><a id="s1490"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1185">Posterior cerebral artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1935">The paired posterior cerebral arteries are the terminal branches of the basilar artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0020">Figs 26.3</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0030">26.5</a>). Surgical nomenclature divides the vessel into three parts: P1 – from the basilar bifurcation to the junction with the posterior communicating artery; P2 – from the junction with the posterior communicating artery to the portion in the perimesencephalic cistern; and P3 – the portion that runs in the calcarine fissure.</div><div class="text" id="p1940">The posterior cerebral artery is larger than the superior cerebellar artery, from which it is separated near its origin by the oculomotor nerve and, lateral to the midbrain, by the trochlear nerve. It passes laterally, parallel with the superior cerebellar artery, and receives the posterior communicating artery. It then winds round the cerebral peduncle and reaches the tentorial cerebral surface, where it supplies the temporal and occipital lobes. Like the anterior and middle cerebral arteries, the posterior cerebral artery has cortical and central branches.</div><div class="text" id="p1945">The cortical branches of the posterior cerebral artery are named according to their distribution. Temporal branches, usually two, are distributed to the uncus and parahippocampal, medial occipitotemporal and lateral occipitotemporal gyri. Occipital branches supply the cuneus, lingual gyrus and posterolateral surface of the occipital lobe. Parieto-occipital branches supply the cuneus and precuneus. The posterior cerebral artery supplies the visual areas of the cerebral cortex and other structures in the visual pathway.</div><div class="text" id="p1950">The central branches supply subcortical structures. Several small posteromedial central branches arise from the beginning of the posterior cerebral artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0020">Fig. 26.3</a>) and, together with similar branches from the posterior communicating artery, pierce the posterior perforated substance to supply the anterior thalamus, subthalamus, lateral wall of the third ventricle and globus pallidus. One or more posterior choroidal branches pass over the lateral geniculate body and supply it before entering the posterior part of the inferior horn of the lateral ventricle via the lower part of the choroidal fissure. Branches also curl round the posterior end of the thalamus and pass through the transverse fissure, or go to the choroid plexus of the third ventricle, or traverse the upper choroidal fissure. Collectively these branches supply the choroid plexuses of the third and lateral ventricles and the fornix. Small posterolateral central branches arise from the posterior cerebral artery beyond the cerebral peduncle, and supply the peduncle and the posterior thalamus, superior and inferior colliculi, pineal gland and medial geniculate body.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s1495"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle1190">Internal thoracic artery</h4><div class="textfl" id="p1955">The internal thoracic (mammary) artery arises inferiorly from the first part of the subclavian artery, approximately 2<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm superior to the sternal end of the clavicle and opposite the root of the thyrocervical trunk (see <a href="../B9780702077050000525/B9780702077050000525.xhtml#f0020">Fig. 52.3</a>). It descends posterior to the first six costal cartilages and intervening intercostal spaces, about 1<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm lateral to the lateral sternal border and divides at the level of the sixth intercostal space into musculophrenic and superior epigastric branches.</div><div class="text" id="p1960">Both the right and left internal thoracic arteries are used as standard in coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) reflecting successful long-term outcomes. Variations are rare, however when present, they must be imaged prior to harvesting for CABG: morphologically abnormal internal thoracic arteries have been shown to supply major parts of the gastrointestinal tract (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib180" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_180">Mashhour et al 2018</a>).</div><section><a id="s1500"/><section><a id="s1505"/><section><a id="s1510"/><section><a id="s1515"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1195">Relations</p><div class="textfl" id="p1965">From its origin, the internal thoracic artery descends anteromedially, passing posterior to the sternal end of the clavicle, the internal jugular and brachiocephalic veins, and the first costal cartilage. As it enters the thoracic cavity, the phrenic nerve crosses it obliquely from its lateral side either superior or inferior to the nerve. The artery then descends almost vertically to its bifurcation, lying anterior to transversus thoracis and posterior to the first six costal cartilages, internal intercostals and terminations of the upper six intercostal nerves. Down to the second or third cartilage it is separated from the costal parietal pleura and associated endothoracic fascia by a strong layer of fascia, and below this transversus thoracis intervenes. The artery is accompanied by the parasternal lymph nodes (see <a href="../B9780702077050000562/B9780702077050000562.xhtml#f0025">Fig. 56.4A</a>) and by venae comitantes that unite at about the third costal cartilage into a single vein medial to the artery. Its intermediate branches are sternal, anterior intercostal and perforating.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s1520"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1200">Sternal branches</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1970">Sternal branches are distributed to transversus thoracis, the periosteum of the posterior sternal surface and the sternal red bone marrow. These branches, together with small branches of the pericardiacophrenic artery, anastomose with branches of the posterior intercostal and bronchial arteries to form a subpleural mediastinal plexus.</div></section><section><a id="s1525"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1205">Anterior intercostal branches</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1975">Anterior intercostal arteries are distributed to the upper six intercostal spaces. They usually arise from the internal thoracic artery as single vessels that promptly divide into two branches (anterior and collateral intercostal arteries) that pass laterally along the superior and inferior borders of each space and anastomose with the posterior intercostal arteries and their collateral branches (see <a href="../B9780702077050000537/B9780702077050000537.xhtml#f0070">Figs 53.17</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000537/B9780702077050000537.xhtml#f0150">53.19</a>). Occasionally, separate branches of the anterior intercostal artery pass to the intercostal space located superiorly and/or inferiorly and the two branches of an anterior intercostal may sometimes arise separately from the internal thoracic artery. At first, the arteries lie between the endothoracic fascia and associated costal parietal pleura posteriorly, and the internal intercostals anteriorly. As they pass posteriorly within a space they lie between the innermost and internal intercostals. They supply the intercostal muscles and send branches through them to the pectoral muscles, breast and skin.</div></section><section><a id="s1530"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1210">Perforating branches</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1980">Perforating branches traverse the upper five or six intercostal spaces with the anterior cutaneous branches of the corresponding intercostal nerves. They pierce and supply pectoralis major, and then curve laterally to become direct cutaneous vessels that supply the skin (see <a href="../B9780702077050000537/B9780702077050000537.xhtml#f0150">Fig. 53.19</a>). These cutaneous vessels provide the anatomical basis for surgically raising the deltopectoral skin flap that is used for reconstructing areas of missing tissue in the head and neck. The second to fourth branches supply the breast and become enlarged during lactation (see <a href="../B9780702077050000537/B9780702077050000537.xhtml#f0165">Fig. 53.22</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s1535"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1215">Musculophrenic artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1985">The musculophrenic artery passes inferolaterally posterior to the seventh to ninth costal cartilages, close to the costal arch, then traverses the respiratory diaphragm and terminates near the eleventh (last) intercostal space (see <a href="../B9780702077050000550/B9780702077050000550.xhtml#f0010">Fig. 55.2</a>). It anastomoses with the inferior phrenic <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E88" id="pagebreak_1.464E88"/><a id="pg1464.e86"/>and lower two posterior intercostal arteries and ascending branches of the deep circumflex iliac arteries. Two anterior intercostal arteries branch from it for each of the seventh to ninth intercostal spaces, and are distributed similarly to their counterparts in other intercostal spaces. The musculophrenic artery also supplies the lower part of the pericardium and the abdominal muscles.</div></section><section><a id="s1540"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1220">Superior epigastric artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1990">The superior epigastric artery arises at the level of the sixth costal cartilage and descends between the costal and sternal parts of the respiratory diaphragm, accompanied by two or more veins that drain to the internal thoracic vein (see <a href="../B9780702077050000604/B9780702077050000604.xhtml#f0080">Figs 60.1</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000604/B9780702077050000604.xhtml#f0010">60.2</a>). The vessels pass anterior to the distal fibres of transversus thoracis and the proximal fibres of transversus abdominis before entering the rectus sheath, where they run inferiorly behind rectus abdominis. They anastomose with the inferior epigastric arteries within rectus abdominis in one of several potential branching patterns (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib260" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Rozen et al 2008</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p1995">Vascular branches supply rectus abdominis itself and perforate the anterior layer of the rectus sheath to supply the abdominal skin and subcutaneous fat. These vessels generally penetrate rectus abdominis within a 10<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm circle around the umbilicus and are referred to clinically as ‘peri-umbilical perforator’ vessels. A branch given off in the proximal rectus sheath passes anterior to the xiphoid process of the sternum and anastomoses with a corresponding contralateral branch. This vessel can give rise to bleeding during surgical incisions that extend up to and alongside the xiphoid process. The superior epigastric artery also gives small branches to the anterior part of the respiratory diaphragm. On the right, small branches reach the falciform ligament, where they anastomose with branches from the hepatic artery.</div></section><section><a id="s1545"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1225">Clinical significance of the internal thoracic artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2000">The internal thoracic artery has a number of clinical uses but perhaps most significant is that it is the vessel of choice for coronary artery bypass grafting. It has become a popular recipient vessel for free flap transfers to the chest wall, principally for breast reconstruction (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib208" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_208">Ninković et al 1995</a>), and has largely superseded the thoracodorsal vessels for this purpose. It is routinely accessed by removing a portion of the third costal cartilage (see <a href="../B9780702077050000537/B9780702077050000537.xhtml#f0075">Fig. 53.18</a>), although some surgeons prefer to dissect the vessels between the ribs, with a rib-sparing approach (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib233" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_233">Parrett et al 2008</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib177" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_177">Malata et al 2011</a>) or even utilizing the anterior perforating branches as they pierce pectoralis major (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib231" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_231">Park et al 2003</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib199" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_199">Munhoz et al 2004</a>). The anterior perforating branches form the vascular pedicles for fasciocutaneous flaps raised from the anterior chest wall that have been used for many decades in head and neck reconstruction (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib11" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_11">Bakamjian et al 1971</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib206" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_206">Neligan et al 2007</a>). The superior epigastric artery is the main vascular pedicle for the superiorly based rectus abdominis flap, a muscle or myocutaneous flap useful in breast, sternal and chest wall reconstruction (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib115" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_115">Hartrampf et al 1982</a>). During CT-guided lung and mediastinal biopsies, the internal thoracic vessels must be avoided; exsanguination has been reported following Tru-Cut needle trauma: the approach must be at least 2<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm lateral to the sternal margin. The vessels are not seen easily on non-contrast fluoroscopic CT images.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s1550"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle1230">Thyrocervical trunk</h4><div class="textfl" id="p2005">The thyrocervical trunk is a short, wide artery that arises from the first part of the subclavian artery near the medial border of scalenus anterior, and divides almost at once into the inferior thyroid, suprascapular and superficial cervical arteries.</div><section><a id="s1555"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1235">Inferior thyroid artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2010">The inferior thyroid artery loops upwards anterior to the medial border of scalenus anterior, turns medially just below the sixth cervical transverse process, and then descends on longus colli to the lower border of the thyroid gland (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0090">Fig. 35.17</a>). It passes anterior to the vertebral vessels and posterior to the carotid sheath and its contents (and usually the sympathetic trunk, whose middle cervical ganglion frequently adjoins the vessel). On the left, near its origin, the artery is crossed anteriorly by the thoracic duct as the latter curves inferolaterally to its termination. Relations between the terminal branches of the artery and recurrent laryngeal nerve are very variable and of considerable surgical importance. The artery usually passes behind the nerve as it nears the gland. However, very close to the gland, the right nerve is equally likely to be anterior, posterior or amongst the branches of the artery, and the left nerve is usually posterior. Together with the inferior thyroid and common carotid arteries, the recurrent laryngeal nerve forms one of the sides of Beahr’s triangle. Since the nerve winds around the artery of the sixth branchial arch (aortic arch) on the left side, it is 45<sup>°</sup> to the midline in its ascent from the chest to the neck. However, on the right side it is slightly more superficial and lateral because it goes around the fourth branchial arch artery (subclavian) in the neck: these variations are important in thyroid surgery and are reversed in dextrocardia. The artery is not accompanied by the inferior thyroid vein.</div><section><a id="s1560"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1240">Muscular branches</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2015">These supply the infrahyoid muscles, longus colli, scalenus anterior and the inferior pharyngeal constrictor.</div></section><section><a id="s1565"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1245">Ascending cervical artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2020">The ascending cervical artery is a small branch that arises as the inferior thyroid turns medially behind the carotid sheath and ascends on the anterior tubercles of the cervical transverse processes between scalenus anterior and longus capitis. It supplies the adjacent muscles and gives off one or two spinal branches that enter the vertebral canal through the intervertebral foramina to supply the spinal cord and membranes and vertebral bodies, and thereby supplement the spinal branches of the vertebral artery. The ascending cervical artery anastomoses with the vertebral, ascending pharyngeal, occipital and deep cervical arteries.</div></section><section><a id="s1570"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1250">Inferior laryngeal artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2025">The inferior laryngeal artery ascends on the trachea with the recurrent laryngeal nerve, enters the larynx at the lower border of the inferior constrictor and supplies the laryngeal muscles and mucosa. It anastomoses with its contralateral fellow, and with the superior laryngeal branch of the superior thyroid artery.</div></section><section><a id="s1575"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1255">Pharyngeal branches</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2030">These supply the lower part of the pharynx. Tracheal branches supply the trachea and anastomose with the bronchial arteries; oesophageal branches supply the oesophagus and anastomose with the oesophageal branches of the thoracic aorta; inferior and ascending glandular branches supply the posterior and inferior regions of the thyroid gland and anastomose with the contralateral inferior and ipsilateral superior thyroid arteries. The ascending branch also supplies the parathyroid glands.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1580"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1260">Suprascapular artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2035">The suprascapular artery usually arises from the thyrocervical trunk of the subclavian artery, although it may arise from the third part of the subclavian artery. It first descends laterally across scalenus anterior and the phrenic nerve, posterior to the internal jugular vein and sternocleidomastoid (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0040">Fig. 35.7A</a>), then crosses anterior to the subclavian artery and brachial plexus, posterior and parallel with the clavicle, subclavius and the inferior belly of omohyoid, to reach the superior border of the scapula. Here, it passes above (sometimes, under) the superior transverse ligament, separating it from the suprascapular nerve, and enters the supraspinous fossa (see <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0160">Figs 49.31</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0170">49.33</a>), where it lies on the bone, and supplies supraspinatus. It descends behind the scapular neck, and passes through the spinoglenoid notch deep to the inferior transverse ligament to gain the deep surface of infraspinatus, where it anastomoses with the circumflex scapular and deep branch of the transverse cervical artery. Its muscular branches supply sternocleidomastoid, subclavius and infraspinatus. It also gives off a suprasternal branch that crosses the sternal end of the clavicle to supply the skin of the upper thorax, and an acromial branch that pierces trapezius to supply the skin over the shoulder. This last branch anastomoses with the thoraco-acromial and posterior circumflex humeral arteries.</div><div class="text" id="p2040">As the suprascapular artery passes over the superior transverse ligament, it gives off a branch that enters the subscapular fossa beneath subscapularis and anastomoses with the subscapular artery and the deep branch of the transverse cervical artery. It also supplies the acromioclavicular and glenohumeral joints, the clavicle and the scapula.</div></section><section><a id="s1585"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1265">Superficial cervical artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2045">The superficial cervical artery is given off at a higher level than the suprascapular artery. It crosses anterior to the phrenic nerve, scalenus anterior and the brachial plexus, and is covered by the internal jugular vein, sternocleidomastoid and platysma. It crosses the floor of the posterior triangle to reach the anterior margin of levator scapulae and ascends deep to the anterior part of the trapezius, which it supplies, together with the adjoining muscles and the cervical lymph nodes. It anastomoses with the superficial ramus of the descending branch of the occipital artery. About a third of the superficial cervical and dorsal scapular arteries arise in common from the thyrocervical trunk, with a superficial (superficial cervical artery) and a deep (dorsal scapular artery) branch (see <a href="../B9780702077050000331/B9780702077050000331.xhtml#f0010">Figs 33.1A</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000331/B9780702077050000331.xhtml#f0015">33.2A</a>). The latter passes laterally anterior to the brachial plexus and then posterior to levator scapulae.<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E89" id="pagebreak_1.464E89"/><a id="pg1464.e87"/></div></section></section><section><a id="s1590"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle1270">Costocervical trunk</h4><div class="textfl" id="p2050">On the right, this short vessel arises posteriorly from the second part of the subclavian artery, and, on the left, from its first part. It arches back above the cervical pleura to the neck of the first rib, where it divides into supreme intercostal and deep cervical branches.</div><section><a id="s9595"/><section><a id="s1595"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1275">Supreme intercostal artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2055">The supreme (highest) intercostal artery arises from the costocervical trunk. It descends between the parietal pleura and associated endothoracic fascia, and the neck of the first and second ribs, and anastomoses with the third posterior intercostal artery. Crossing the neck of the first rib, it lies medial to the ventral ramus of the first thoracic nerve (crossing it at a lower level), and lateral to the stellate ganglion (see <a href="../B9780702077050000550/B9780702077050000550.xhtml#f0030">Fig. 55.10</a>). In the first intercostal space it gives off the first posterior intercostal artery, which has a similar distribution to the more inferiorly located posterior intercostal arteries. It descends to become the second posterior intercostal artery, usually joining a branch from the third. The artery is not constant, and is more common on the right: when absent, it is replaced by a direct branch from the aorta.</div></section><section><a id="s1600"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1280">Deep cervical artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2060">The deep cervical artery usually arises from the costocervical trunk (see <a href="../B9780702077050000331/B9780702077050000331.xhtml#f0015">Fig. 33.1A</a>). It is analogous in its first segment to a posterior branch of a posterior intercostal artery, and occasionally is a separate branch of the subclavian artery. It passes back above the eighth cervical spinal nerve between the transverse process of the seventh cervical vertebra and the neck of the first rib (sometimes between the transverse processes of the sixth and seventh cervical vertebrae). It then ascends between semispinales capitis and cervicis to the level of the second cervical vertebra. It supplies adjacent muscles and anastomoses with the deep branch of the descending branch of the occipital artery and branches of the vertebral artery. A spinal branch enters the vertebral canal between the seventh cervical and first thoracic vertebrae.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s1605"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle1285">Dorsal scapular artery</h4><div class="textfl" id="p2065">In the majority of cases, the dorsal scapular artery arises from the third, or less often the second, part of the subclavian artery. It passes laterally through the trunks of the brachial plexus in front of scalenus medius and then deep to levator scapulae to reach the superior scapular angle. Here, it descends with the dorsal scapular nerve under the rhomboids along the medial border of the scapula to the inferior angle. It supplies the rhomboids, latissimus dorsi and the inferior portion of trapezius and the skin over the inferomedial aspect of trapezius via musculocutaneous perforators. It anastomoses with the suprascapular and subscapular arteries and with posterior branches of some posterior intercostal arteries. It sends a small branch to scalenus anterior; sometimes, this arises directly from the subclavian artery.</div><section><a id="s1610"/><section><a id="s1615"/><section><a id="s1620"/><section><a id="s91620"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1290">Variants</p><div class="textfl" id="p2070">About one-third of the superficial cervical and dorsal scapular arteries arise as a common vessel, the transverse cervical artery, from the thyrocervical trunk, which then divides into a superficial and a deep branch (superficial cervical and dorsal scapular arteries, respectively) (see <a href="../B9780702077050000331/B9780702077050000331.xhtml#f0015">Figs 33.1A</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0160">Fig. 49.31</a>). In this case, the dorsal scapular artery arises near the superior border of the scapula; it passes laterally, anterior to the brachial plexus and then posterior to levator scapulae.</div></section></section></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s1625"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle1295">Axillary artery</h3><div class="textfl" id="p2075">The axillary artery, a continuation of the subclavian artery, begins at the outer border of the first rib and ends nominally at the inferior border of teres major, where it becomes the brachial artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0160">Fig. 49.31</a>). Its direction varies with the position of the limb; it is almost straight when the arm is raised at right-angles, concave upwards when the arm is elevated above this level, and convex upwards and laterally when the arm is by the side (see <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495.xhtml">Fig. 49.32</a>). At first deep, it subsequently becomes superficial, when it is covered only by the skin and fasciae. Pectoralis minor crosses it and so divides it into three parts, which are proximal, posterior and distal to the muscle.</div><div class="text" id="p2080">The branches of the axillary artery are the superior thoracic artery (first part), thoraco-acromial and lateral thoracic arteries (second part), and subscapular, and anterior and posterior circumflex humeral arteries (third part) (see <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0200">Fig. 49.47</a>).</div><section><a id="s1630"/><section><a id="s1635"/><section><a id="s1640"/><section><a id="s1645"/><section><a id="s1650"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1300">Relations of the first part</p><div class="textfl" id="p2085">The skin, superficial fascia, platysma, supraclavicular nerves, deep fascia, clavicular fibres of pectoralis major and the clavipectoral fascia, lateral pectoral nerve and the loop of communication between the lateral and medial pectoral nerves, and the thoraco-acromial and cephalic veins are all anterior. The first intercostal space and external intercostal, first and second digitations of serratus anterior, long thoracic and medial pectoral nerves, and the medial cord of the brachial plexus are all posterior. The posterior cord of the brachial plexus is lateral and the axillary vein is anteromedial. The first part is enclosed with the axillary vein and brachial plexus in a fibrous axillary sheath, which is continuous with the prevertebral layer of the deep cervical fascia.</div></section><section><a id="s1655"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1305">Relations of the second part</p><div class="textfl" id="p2090">The skin, superficial and deep fascia, and pectoralis major and minor are all anterior. The posterior cord of the brachial plexus and the areolar tissue between it and subscapularis are posterior. The axillary vein is medial, separated from the artery by the medial cord of the brachial plexus and the medial pectoral nerve. The lateral cord of the brachial plexus is lateral, separating the artery from coracobrachialis. The cords of the brachial plexus thus surround the second part on three sides, with the dispositions implied by their names, and separate it from the vein and adjacent muscles.</div></section><section><a id="s1660"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1310">Relations of the third part</p><div class="textfl" id="p2095">Pectoralis major and, distal to the muscle, skin and fasciae are anterior. The lower part of subscapularis and the tendons of latissimus dorsi and teres major are posterior. Coracobrachialis is lateral and the axillary vein is medial. Branches of the brachial plexus are arranged as follows: laterally, the lateral root and then trunk of the median nerve and, for a short distance, the musculocutaneous nerve; medially, the medial cutaneous nerve of the forearm between the axillary artery and vein anteriorly, and the ulnar nerve between these vessels posteriorly; anteriorly, the medial root of the median nerve; and posteriorly, the radial and axillary nerves, the latter only to the distal border of subscapularis. The dispositions of the branches of the brachial plexus around the axillary artery have, therefore, altered: there has been a rotation such that the nerves derived from the lateral cord are now more anterior, those from the medial cord more posterior, and those of the posterior cord come to lie more laterally.</div></section><section><a id="s1665"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1315">Variants</p><div class="textfl" id="p2100">The branches of the axillary artery exhibit considerable variation. An alar thoracic artery, often from the second part, may supply fat and lymph nodes in the axilla. The lateral thoracic artery may be absent, in which case it is replaced by lateral perforating branches of the intercostal arteries; alternatively, it may become, or give off, a direct cutaneous vessel (named the superficial thoracic artery by some sources) that supplies the skin over the lateral border of pectoralis major. In up to one-third of cases, the subscapular artery can arise from a common trunk with the posterior circumflex humeral artery. Occasionally the subscapular, circumflex humeral and profunda brachii arteries arise in common, and in this case, branches of the brachial plexus surround this common vessel instead of the axillary artery. The posterior circumflex humeral artery may arise from the profunda brachii artery and pass back below teres major, instead of passing through the quadrangular space. Sometimes the axillary artery divides into radial and ulnar arteries (anomalous ‘high division’) and is, occasionally, the source of the anterior interosseous artery.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s1670"/><h4 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1320">Superior thoracic artery</h4><div class="textfl" id="p2105">The superior thoracic artery is a small vessel that arises from the first part of the axillary artery near the lower border of subclavius; it sometimes arises from the thoraco-acromial artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0200">Fig. 49.47</a>). It runs anteromedially above the medial border of pectoralis minor, then passes between it and pectoralis major to gain the thoracic wall. It supplies these muscles and the thoracic wall, and anastomoses with the internal thoracic and upper intercostal arteries.</div></section><section><a id="s1675"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1325">Thoraco-acromial (acromiothoracic) artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2110">The thoraco-acromial artery is a short branch that arises from the second part of the axillary artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495.xhtml#f0140">Figs 49.27</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0200">49.47</a>). It is initially overlapped by pectoralis minor, skirting its medial border; it next pierces the clavipectoral fascia and divides into pectoral, acromial, clavicular and deltoid branches, which supply pectoralis major and minor, an area of skin over the clavipectoral fascia, and the anterior portion of deltoid.</div><section><a id="s1680"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1330">Pectoral branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p2115">The pectoral branch is the largest branch. It descends between the pectoral muscles, gives a branch to pectoralis minor, and then continues on the deep surface of pectoralis major. It enters the muscle and anastomoses with the intercostal branches of the internal thoracic and lateral thoracic arteries. It gives off perforating branches to the breast, and musculocutaneous perforators to the skin over pectoralis major.<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E90" id="pagebreak_1.464E90"/><a id="pg1464.e88"/></div></section><section><a id="s1685"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1335">Acromial branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p2120">The acromial branch crosses the coracoid process under deltoid, which it supplies, then pierces the muscle and ends on the acromion. It anastomoses with branches of the suprascapular artery, the deltoid branch of the thoraco-acromial artery and the posterior circumflex humeral arteries.</div></section><section><a id="s1690"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1340">Clavicular branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p2125">The clavicular branch ascends medially between the clavicular part of pectoralis major and the clavipectoral fascia. It supplies the sternoclavicular joint and subclavius.</div></section><section><a id="s1695"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1345">Deltoid branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p2130">The deltoid branch often arises with the acromial branch. It crosses pectoralis minor to accompany the cephalic vein between pectoralis major and deltoid, and supplies both muscles.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1700"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1350">Lateral thoracic artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2135">The lateral thoracic artery arises from the second part of the axillary artery. Following the lateral border of pectoralis minor, it passes to the deep surface of pectoralis major as far distally as the fifth intercostal space (see <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0190">Fig. 49.45</a>). It supplies serratus anterior and the pectoral muscles, the axillary lymph nodes and subscapularis. It anastomoses with the internal thoracic, subscapular and intercostal arteries, and with the pectoral branch of the thoraco-acromial artery. In females, it is large and has lateral mammary branches, which curve round the lateral border of pectoralis major to the breast. In both males and females, it gives off cutaneous branches that pass around the lateral border of pectoralis major to supply the skin in this region.</div></section><section><a id="s1705"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1355">Subscapular artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2140">The subscapular artery is the largest branch of the axillary artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0160">Figs 49.31</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0200">49.47</a>). It usually arises from the third part of the axillary artery at the distal (inferior) border of subscapularis, which it follows to the inferior scapular angle where it anastomoses with the lateral thoracic and intercostal arteries and the deep branch of the transverse cervical artery. It supplies adjacent muscles and the thoracic wall. It is accompanied distally by the nerve to latissimus dorsi. Approximately 4<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm from its origin the subscapular artery divides into the circumflex scapular and thoracodorsal arteries.</div><section><a id="s1710"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1360">Circumflex scapular artery</p><div class="textfl" id="p2145">The circumflex scapular artery, the larger of the two terminal branches of the subscapular artery, curves backwards around the lateral border of the scapula, traversing a triangular space between subscapularis above, teres major below and the long head of the triceps laterally (see <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0170">Fig. 49.33</a>). It enters the infraspinous fossa under teres minor and then divides. One branch (infrascapular) enters the subscapular fossa deep to subscapularis, and anastomoses with the suprascapular and dorsal scapular arteries (or deep branch of the transverse cervical artery). The other branch continues along the lateral border of the scapula between teres major and minor, then, dorsal to the inferior angle, anastomoses with the dorsal scapular artery. Small branches supply the posterior part of deltoid and the long head of triceps, and anastomose with an ascending branch of the profunda brachii artery.</div><div class="text" id="p2150">Two significant cutaneous branches arise from the circumflex scapular artery as it emerges through the upper triangular space. The superior, or horizontal, branch is a direct cutaneous artery that passes medially at the level of the deep fascia parallel with the spine of the scapula and supplies a band of skin overlying the spine of the scapula. The lower branch (parascapular branch) is also a direct cutaneous vessel that passes in an inferomedial direction, again at the level of the deep fascia, and supplies an area of skin overlying the lateral border of the scapula. Both of these cutaneous vessels provide the anatomical basis of skin flaps that can be surgically raised in this region (scapular flap based on the horizontal branch and parascapular flap based on the lower, parascapular branch) to reconstruct areas of missing tissue elsewhere in the body.</div></section><section><a id="s1715"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1365">Thoracodorsal artery</p><div class="textfl" id="p2155">The other terminal branch of the subscapular artery, the thoracodorsal artery, follows the lateral margin of the scapula, posterior to the lateral thoracic artery, between latissimus dorsi and serratus anterior. Before entering the deep surface of latissimus dorsi, it supplies teres major and the intercostals, and sends one or two branches to serratus anterior. It enters latissimus dorsi with the thoracodorsal nerve; this constitutes the principal neurovascular pedicle to the muscle. It provides numerous musculocutaneous perforators that supply the skin over the superior part of latissimus dorsi. The intramuscular portion of the artery anastomoses with intercostal arteries and lumbar perforating arteries.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1720"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1370">Anterior circumflex humeral artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2160">The anterior circumflex humeral artery arises from the lateral side of the axillary artery at the distal border of subscapularis (see <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0160">Fig. 49.31</a>). It runs horizontally behind coracobrachialis and the short head of biceps, anterior to the surgical neck of the humerus. Reaching the intertubercular sulcus, it sends an ascending branch to supply the humeral head and shoulder joint (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib41" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_41">Brooks et al 1993</a>), continues laterally under the long head of biceps and deltoid, and anastomoses with the posterior circumflex humeral artery.</div></section><section><a id="s1725"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1375">Posterior circumflex humeral artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2165">The posterior circumflex humeral artery is larger than the anterior (see <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0160">Fig. 49.31</a>). It branches from the third part of the axillary artery at the distal border of subscapularis and runs backwards with the axillary nerve through a quadrangular space bounded by subscapularis, the capsule of the shoulder joint and teres minor above, teres major below, the long head of triceps medially, and the surgical neck of the humerus laterally (see <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495.xhtml#f0115">Fig. 49.22B</a>). It curves round the humeral neck and supplies the shoulder joint, deltoid, teres major and minor, and long and lateral heads of triceps (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib96" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_96">Gerber et al 1990</a>). It gives off a descending branch that anastomoses with the deltoid branch of the profunda brachii artery and with the anterior circumflex humeral and acromial branches of the suprascapular and thoraco-acromial arteries.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1730"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1380">Potential vascular anastomoses around the shoulder girdle: clinical relevance</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2170">The potential vascular anastomoses around the shoulder girdle are numerous, which means that collateral perfusion of the upper limb is possible in occlusion of the axillary artery or vein. In acute occlusion of the axillary artery, these potential anastomoses are not reliable and clinicians should not rely on anastomotic perfusion of the acutely ischaemic limb. The axillary artery is most ‘at risk’ of occlusion as a result of intimal separation and dissection in its second part, behind pectoralis minor, an injury associated with infraclavicular brachial plexus traction lesions (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib33" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_33">Birch 2011</a>). Although magnetic resonance imaging with angiography is recommended for the diagnosis of the poorly perfused limb after distraction trauma, the site of intimal rupture is so consistent as to make urgent surgical exploration without imaging a reasonable clinical decision.</div></section><section><a id="s1735"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1385">Angiomyosomes</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2175">The axillary artery supplies the muscles of the ventral compartments of the shoulder, including the pectoral–deltoid muscle sheet, the scapulohumeral muscles (other than the posterosuperior rotator cuff) and the shoulder joint, including the scapula (with the serratus muscles) and proximal humerus. Its terminal branch, the brachial artery, supplies the muscles of the anterior compartment of the arm. The profunda brachii artery, the major proximal branch of the brachial artery, supplies the muscles of the posterior compartment of the arm and the shaft of the humerus.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s1740"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle1390">Brachial artery</h3><div class="textfl" id="p2180">The brachial artery is a continuation of the axillary artery. It begins at the distal (inferior) border of the tendon of teres major and ends about a centimetre distal to the elbow joint (at the level of the neck of the radius) by dividing into the radial and ulnar arteries (see <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0170">Figs 49.33</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0185">49.44</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0115">50.21</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0120">50.22</a>). At first, it is medial to the humerus, but gradually spirals anterior to it until it lies midway between the humeral epicondyles, medial to the tendon of biceps brachii and deep to the bicipital aponeurosis. The latter separates the artery from the anterior structures, namely the skin, superficial fascia and the median cubital vein. The artery divides into its terminal branches, the radial and ulnar arteries, at the level of the radial neck (see <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0150">Fig. 50.27A</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p2185">The branches of the brachial artery are the profunda brachii, nutrient, superior, middle and inferior ulnar collateral, deltoid, muscular, radial and ulnar arteries.</div><section><a id="s1745"/><section><a id="s1750"/><section><a id="s1755"/><section><a id="s1760"/><section><a id="s1765"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1395">Relations</p><div class="textfl" id="p2190">The brachial artery is wholly superficial, covered anteriorly only by skin and superficial and deep fascia: its pulsation can be felt throughout the arm. The bicipital aponeurosis crosses it anteriorly at the elbow, separating it from the median cubital vein; the median nerve crosses it lateromedially near the distal attachment of coracobrachialis. Posterior to the artery are the long head of triceps, separated initially by the radial nerve and profunda brachii artery, and then successively <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E91" id="pagebreak_1.464E91"/><a id="pg1464.e89"/>by the medial head of triceps, the attachment of coracobrachialis and brachialis. Proximally, the median nerve and coracobrachialis lie laterally and the medial cutaneous nerve of the forearm and ulnar nerve lie medially. Distally, biceps brachii overlaps the artery laterally and the median nerve and basilic vein lie medially. The artery is accompanied by two venae comitantes, connected by transverse and oblique branches. At the elbow, the brachial artery sinks deeply into the triangular intermuscular cubital fossa. Posteriorly, brachialis separates it from the elbow joint. The median nerve passes close to the medial side of the artery.</div></section><section><a id="s1770"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1400">Variants</p><div class="textfl" id="p2195">The brachial artery, with the median nerve, may diverge from the medial border of biceps brachii and descend towards the medial humeral epicondyle, usually behind a supracondylar process from which a fibrous arch crosses the artery, and which then runs behind or through pronator teres to the elbow. Occasionally the artery divides proximally into two trunks that reunite. Frequently it divides more proximally than usual into radial, ulnar and common interosseous arteries. Most often the radial branches arise proximally, leaving a common trunk for the ulnar and common interosseous arteries. Sometimes the ulnar artery arises proximally and the radial and common interosseous arteries form the other division, or the common interosseous may also arise proximally. Slender vasa aberrantia may connect the brachial artery to the axillary artery or to one of the forearm arteries, usually the radial. The brachial artery may be crossed by muscular or tendinous slips from coracobrachialis, biceps brachii, brachialis or pronator teres. Rarely the median nerve crosses posterior, rather than anterior, to the brachial artery near the insertion of coracobrachialis.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s1775"/><h4 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1405">Profunda brachii artery</h4><div class="textfl" id="p2200">The profunda brachii artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0160">Figs 49.31</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0170">49.33</a>) is a large branch from the posteromedial aspect of the brachial artery, distal to teres major. It follows the radial nerve closely, at first posteriorly between the long and medial heads of triceps, then in the spiral groove covered by the lateral head of triceps. It supplies muscular branches, and the nutrient artery of the humerus, and finally divides into terminal radial and middle collateral branches. The radial collateral branch pierces the lateral intermuscular septum to reach the anterior aspect of the epicondyle of the humerus in the groove between brachioradialis and brachialis, and takes part in the anastomosis around the elbow. The middle collateral branch runs posterior to the septum and epicondyle.</div><div class="text" id="p2205">The profunda brachii may originate from a common origin with the posterior circumflex humeral artery, from the axillary artery proximal to the tendon of latissimus dorsi, or from the distal portion of the axillary artery.</div><section><a id="s1780"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1410">Middle collateral (posterior descending) branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p2210">The middle collateral artery is the larger terminal branch of the profunda brachii artery. It arises posterior to the humerus and descends along the posterior surface of the lateral intermuscular septum to the elbow. Proximally, the artery lies between brachialis (anteriorly) and the lateral head of triceps (posteriorly). Distally, it lies between brachioradialis (anteriorly) and the lateral head of triceps (posteriorly). It may pierce the deep fascia and become cutaneous, or remain deep to the fascia, forming an arch with the inferior ulnar collateral artery proximal to the olecranon fossa before anastomosing with the interosseous recurrent artery behind the lateral epicondyle; it gives off about five small fasciocutaneous perforators and often has a small branch that accompanies the nerve to anconeus.</div></section><section><a id="s1785"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1415">Radial collateral (anterior descending) branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p2215">The radial collateral artery accompanies the radial nerve through the lateral intermuscular septum, descending between brachialis and brachioradialis anterior to the lateral epicondyle and anastomosing with the radial recurrent artery. It supplies brachialis, brachioradialis, the radial nerve and a few fasciocutaneous perforators.</div></section><section><a id="s1790"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1420">Nutrient artery of humerus</p><div class="textfl" id="p2220">The nutrient artery of the humerus arises near the mid-level of the upper arm and enters the nutrient canal near the attachment of coracobrachialis, posterior to the deltoid tuberosity; it is directed distally.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1795"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1425">Superior ulnar collateral artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2225">The superior ulnar collateral artery arises a little distal to the mid-level of the upper arm, usually from the brachial artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000483/B9780702077050000483.xhtml#f0025">Fig. 48.3</a>), but often as a branch from the profunda brachii. It accompanies the ulnar nerve, piercing the medial intermuscular septum to descend in the posterior compartment and supply the medial head of triceps. It passes between the medial epicondyle and olecranon, ending deep to flexor carpi ulnaris by anastomosing with the posterior ulnar recurrent and inferior collateral arteries. A branch sometimes passes anterior to the medial epicondyle and anastomoses with the anterior ulnar recurrent artery.</div></section><section><a id="s1800"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1430">Middle ulnar collateral artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2230">If present, the middle ulnar collateral artery arises from the brachial artery between the superior and inferior ulnar collateral arteries. It passes anterior to the medial epicondyle, anastomoses with the anterior ulnar recurrent artery, supplies triceps and sends small fasciocutaneous perforators to the skin.</div></section><section><a id="s1805"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1435">Inferior ulnar collateral (supratrochlear) artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2235">The inferior ulnar collateral artery begins approximately 5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm proximal to the elbow. It passes medially between the median nerve and brachialis, pierces the medial intermuscular septum and curls round the humerus between triceps and bone (see <a href="../B9780702077050000483/B9780702077050000483.xhtml#f0025">Figs 48.3</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000495/B9780702077050000495_split_a.xhtml#f0170">49.33</a>). It forms an arch proximal to the olecranon fossa with the middle collateral branch of the profunda brachii artery. As it lies on brachialis, it gives off branches that descend anterior to the medial epicondyle to anastomose with the anterior ulnar recurrent artery. Behind the epicondyle, a branch anastomoses with the superior ulnar collateral and posterior ulnar recurrent arteries.</div></section><section><a id="s1810"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1440">Muscular branches</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2240">Muscular branches are distributed to coracobrachialis, biceps and brachialis.</div></section><section><a id="s1815"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1445">Deltoid (ascending) branch</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2245">The deltoid branch ascends between the lateral and long heads of triceps, and anastomoses with a descending branch of the posterior humeral circumflex artery.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s1820"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle1450">Radial artery</h4><div class="textfl" id="p2250">The radial artery is smaller than the ulnar artery, yet appears a more direct continuation of the brachial artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0115">Figs 50.21</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0120">50.22</a>). It may occasionally arise from a continuation of a superficial brachial artery, or as a high proximal division of an otherwise normal brachial artery and it can give rise to the common interosseous artery.</div><div class="text" id="p2255">The radial artery passes deep to brachioradialis and gives off the radial recurrent artery before continuing into the forearm. It descends along the lateral side of the forearm, accompanied by paired venae comitantes, from the medial side of the neck of the radius to the wrist. The artery is medial to the radial shaft proximally, and anterior to it distally. Proximally, it is overlapped anteriorly by the belly of brachioradialis, but elsewhere in its course it is covered only by the skin and superficial and deep fasciae. Its posterior relations in the forearm are, successively, the tendon of biceps, supinator, the distal attachment of pronator teres, the radial head of flexor digitorum superficialis, flexor pollicis longus, pronator quadratus and the lower end of the radius (where its pulsation is most accessible). Brachioradialis is lateral to the artery throughout its length. Pronator teres is medial to the proximal part of the artery, and the tendon of flexor carpi radialis is medial to the distal portion. The superficial radial nerve lies lateral to the middle third of the radial artery; multiple branches from the artery supply the nerve throughout its length.</div><div class="text" id="p2260">At the wrist, the radial artery passes on to the dorsal aspect of the carpus between the lateral carpal ligament and the tendons of abductor pollicis longus and extensor pollicis brevis (see <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513_split_a.xhtml#f0165">Fig. 51.37</a>). It crosses the scaphoid bone and trapezium (in the anatomical snuff-box), where again, its pulsation is obvious; as it passes between the heads of the first dorsal interosseous, it is crossed by the tendon of extensor pollicis longus. Between the thumb extensors, it is crossed by the start of the cephalic vein and the branches of the radial nerve that pass to the thumb and index finger. Occasionally it gives off a distal superficial dorsal branch that crosses the radial extensor tendons at the wrist, together with the superficial radial nerve. Branches of the lateral cutaneous nerve of the forearm run along its distal part as it curves round the carpus.</div><div class="text" id="p2265">In the hand, the radial artery passes through the first interosseous space between the heads of the first dorsal interosseous and crosses the palm. At first, it lies deep to the oblique head of adductor pollicis and then passes between its oblique and transverse heads or through the transverse head. At the fifth metacarpal base, it anastomoses with the deep branch of the ulnar artery, completing the deep palmar arch (see <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513_split_a.xhtml#f0160">Fig. 51.36</a>).<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E92" id="pagebreak_1.464E92"/><a id="pg1464.e90"/></div><section><a id="s1825"/><section><a id="s1830"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1455">Radial recurrent artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2270">The radial recurrent artery is given off by the radial artery just distal to the elbow joint (see <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0115">Figs 50.21</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0120">50.22</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0160">50.27</a>). It passes between the superficial radial nerve and the posterior interosseous nerve before ascending beneath brachioradialis, anterior to supinator and brachialis. It supplies these muscles and then anastomoses with the radial collateral branch of the profunda brachii artery. The radial recurrent artery also gives branches to extensor carpi radialis longus, extensor digitorum, extensor digiti minimi and extensor carpi ulnaris.</div></section><section><a id="s1835"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1460">Muscular branches</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2275">Muscular branches are distributed to the muscles on the radial side of the forearm. Direct branches from the radial artery supply the radial insertion of pronator teres, the anterolateral aspect of flexor carpi radialis, the lateral surface of flexor digitorum superficialis, the lateral half of flexor pollicis longus, and the distal sections of extensor carpi radialis longus and extensor carpi radialis brevis.</div></section><section><a id="s1840"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1465">Palmar carpal branch</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2280">The palmar carpal branch arises near the distal border of pronator quadratus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0050">Fig. 50.9B</a>). It crosses the anterior surface of the distal end of the radius, near the palmar carpal surface, and passes medially to anastomose behind the long flexor tendons with the palmar carpal branch of the ulnar artery. This transverse anastomosis is joined by longitudinal branches from the anterior interosseous artery and recurrent branches from the deep palmar arch, forming a cruciate palmar radiocarpal arch that supplies the carpal articulations and bones by descending branches.</div></section><section><a id="s1845"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1470">Superficial palmar branch</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2285">The superficial palmar branch arises from the radial artery just before it curves round the carpus. It passes through, and occasionally over, the thenar muscles, which it supplies, and usually anastomoses with the end of the ulnar artery to complete a superficial palmar arch (see <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513_split_a.xhtml#f0160">Fig. 51.36</a>). The superficial arch is complete in about 80% of cases (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib333" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_333">Zarzecki et al 2018</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s1850"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1475">First dorsal metacarpal artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2290">The first dorsal metacarpal artery arises from the radial artery just before it passes between the heads of the first dorsal interosseous. It divides, almost at once, into two branches that supply the adjacent sides of the thumb and index finger as far distally as the proximal interphalangeal joint. The radial side of the thumb receives a branch direct from the radial artery proper. In most cases, the first dorsal metacarpal artery follows a fascial course overlying the first dorsal interosseous and parallel to the second metacarpal. Occasionally it may follow an intramuscular course. Distally, it anastomoses with the dorsal branches of the radiopalmar digital artery of the index finger over the proximal phalanx.</div></section><section><a id="s1855"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1480">Dorsal carpal branch</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2295">The dorsal carpal branch of the radial artery arises deep to the tendons of the thumb extensors. It runs medially across the dorsal carpal surface under the tendons and anastomoses with the ulnar dorsal carpal branch, and also with the anterior and posterior interosseous arteries, to form a dorsal radiocarpal arch (see <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0050">Figs 50.9A</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0050">50.9C</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513_split_a.xhtml#f0165">51.37</a>). The carpal arches are both close to bone and supply the distal epiphysial parts of the radius and ulna. Three dorsal metacarpal arteries descend from the dorsal intercarpal arch on the second to fourth dorsal interossei, and bifurcate into dorsal digital branches to supply the adjacent sides of all four fingers.</div><section><a id="s1860"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1485">Second, third and fourth dorsal metacarpal arteries</p><div class="textfl" id="p2300">The second to fourth dorsal metacarpal arteries arise from the dorsal carpal arch. Near their origins, they anastomose with the deep palmar arch by proximal perforating arteries and, near their bifurcation, with dorsal perforating branches from the palmar metacarpal arteries that pass between the metacarpal necks. They also anastomose distally at the level of the web spaces with dorsal perforating branches from the palmar digital arteries from the superficial palmar arch. The third and fourth dorsal metacarpal arteries are much smaller than the first and second. Cutaneous branches from the dorsal metacarpal arteries supply the dorsal skin as far distally as the proximal interphalangeal joint. At the level of the neck of the second, third and fourth metacarpals, a direct cutaneous branch is given off that passes proximally and supplies an area of skin between the two adjacent metacarpals.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1865"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1490">Arteria princeps pollicis</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2305">The arteria princeps pollicis (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib185" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_185">Miletin et al 2017</a>) arises from the radial artery as it turns into the palm to form the deep palmar arch (see <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513.xhtml#f0170">Fig. 51.2A</a>). It descends on the palmar aspect of the first metacarpal under the oblique head of adductor pollicis lateral to the first palmar interosseous. At the base of the proximal phalanx, deep to the tendon of flexor pollicis longus, the artery divides into two branches that appear between the medial and lateral attachments of the oblique head of adductor pollicis and run along both sides of the thumb. On the palmar surface of the distal phalanx, the branches form a pollicial arch that supplies the skin and subcutaneous tissue. The arteria princeps pollicis is the usual nutrient of supply to the first metacarpal.</div></section><section><a id="s1870"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1495">Arteria radialis indicis</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2310">The arteria radialis indicis is often a proximal branch of the arteria princeps pollicis, or may arise from the superficial arch or from the first dorsal metacarpal artery, or may combine with the arteria princeps pollicis to form the first palmar metacarpal artery. It descends between the first dorsal interosseous and transverse head of adductor pollicis, and runs along the lateral side of the index finger to its tip (see <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513_split_a.xhtml#f0120">Fig. 51.27B</a>). It anastomoses with the index medial digital artery and with the arteria princeps pollicis and the superficial palmar arch at the distal border of the transverse head of adductor pollicis.</div></section><section><a id="s1875"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1500">Deep palmar arch</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2315">The deep palmar arch is formed by anastomosis of the end of the radial artery with the deep palmar branch of the ulnar artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513.xhtml#f0170">Figs 51.2A</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513_split_a.xhtml#f0195">51.35G</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513_split_a.xhtml#f0160">51.36</a>). It crosses the bases of the metacarpals and interossei, covered by the oblique head of adductor pollicis, the tendons of the digital flexors and the lumbricals. In its concavity, running laterally, is the deep branch of the ulnar nerve. The deep palmar arch is incomplete in about 5% (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib333" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Zarzecki et al 2018</a>).</div><section><a id="s1880"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1505">Palmar metacarpal artery</p><div class="textfl" id="p2320">The three palmar metacarpal arteries run distally from the convexity of the deep palmar arch on the interossei of the second to fourth spaces, and join the common digital branches of the superficial arch at the digital clefts (see <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513_split_a.xhtml#f0160">Fig. 51.36</a>). They supply nutrient branches to the medial four metacarpals.</div></section><section><a id="s1885"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1510">Perforating branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p2325">Three perforating branches from the deep palmar arch cross the second to fourth interosseous spaces between the heads of the corresponding dorsal interossei and anastomose with the dorsal metacarpal arteries.</div></section><section><a id="s1890"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1515">Recurrent branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p2330">Recurrent branches ascend proximally from the deep palmar arch anterior to the carpus to supply the carpal bones and intercarpal articulations. They end in the palmar carpal arch.</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s1895"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle1520">Ulnar artery</h4><div class="textfl" id="p2335">The ulnar artery arises from the brachial artery just distal to the flexion crease of the elbow at the level of the radial neck, and reaches the medial side of the forearm in its upper third (see <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0115">Figs 50.21</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0120">50.22</a>). It is larger than the radial artery and is accompanied throughout its length by venae comitantes. In the forearm, the ulnar artery initially lies on brachialis before passing deep to pronator teres, flexor carpi radialis, palmaris longus and flexor digitorum superficialis. It then lies on flexor digitorum profundus, between flexor carpi ulnaris and flexor digitorum superficialis. At the wrist, the ulnar artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513.xhtml#f0175">Fig. 51.10</a>) is covered by skin, fascia and palmaris brevis. It lies between the superficial and main parts of the flexor retinaculum, lateral to the ulnar nerve and pisiform bone, and enters the hand. The median nerve is a medial relation for approximately 2.5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm distal to the elbow, and then crosses the artery, from which it is separated by the ulnar head of pronator teres. The ulnar nerve lies medial to the distal two-thirds of the ulnar artery, which supplies the nerve throughout its length; the palmar cutaneous branch of the ulnar nerve descends along the ulnar artery to reach the hand.</div><div class="text" id="p2340">The ulnar artery may arise above the elbow, when it can lie superficial to the forearm flexors under the deep fascia; only rarely is it subcutaneous. When this occurs, the brachial artery supplies the common interosseous and the ulnar recurrent arteries.</div><section><a id="s1900"/><section><a id="s1905"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1525">Anterior ulnar recurrent artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2345">The anterior ulnar recurrent artery arises from the ulnar artery distal to the elbow and close to the origin of the ulnar artery itself. It ascends between brachialis and pronator teres, which it supplies, then anastomoses with the inferior ulnar collateral artery anterior to the medial <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E93" id="pagebreak_1.464E93"/><a id="pg1464.e91"/>epicondyle (see <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0150">Fig. 50.27A</a>). It limits distal extension of the medial Hotchkiss approach to the coronoid process.</div></section><section><a id="s1910"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1530">Posterior ulnar recurrent artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2350">The posterior ulnar recurrent artery arises from the ulnar artery distal to the anterior ulnar recurrent artery, passes dorsomedially between flexor digitorum profundus and flexor digitorum superficialis, and ascends between the posterior aspect of the medial epicondyle and the olecranon. It is deep to flexor carpi ulnaris, ascending between its heads with the ulnar nerve. It supplies flexor digitorum profundus, flexor digitorum superficialis, flexor carpi ulnaris, the ulnar nerve, underlying bone and the elbow joint, and anastomoses with the ulnar collateral artery and interosseous recurrent artery. The posterior ulnar recurrent artery and ulnar nerve are both vulnerable to injury behind the medial epicondyle (see <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0160">Figs 50.28</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0155">50.29</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s1915"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1535">Common interosseous artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2355">The common interosseous artery is a short branch of the ulnar artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0055">Figs 50.10</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0120">50.22</a>). It arises just distal to the radial tuberosity and passes back to the proximal border of the interosseous membrane, where it divides into the anterior and posterior interosseous arteries. Occasionally the common interosseous artery is a branch of the radial artery.</div></section><section><a id="s1920"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1540">Anterior interosseous artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2360">The anterior interosseous artery arises from the common interosseous artery and descends on the anterior aspect of the interosseous membrane with the anterior interosseous branch of the median nerve (see <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0055">Figs 50.10</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0120">50.22</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0160">50.27</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0180">50.32A</a>). It is overlapped by contiguous sides of flexor digitorum profundus and flexor pollicis longus. Shortly after its origin, it usually gives off a slender median artery. This accompanies and supplies the median nerve as far as the palm, where it may join the superficial palmar arch or end as one or two palmar digital arteries. The median artery can also arise from the ulnar or the common interosseous artery. Muscular and nutrient branches from the anterior interosseous artery pierce the interosseous membrane to supply deep extensor muscles and the radius and ulna, respectively. A branch descends deep to pronator quadratus before piercing the interosseous membrane to join the anterior ‘carpal’ arch.</div><div class="text" id="p2365">The anterior interosseous artery leaves the anterior compartment by piercing the interosseous membrane proximal to pronator quadratus. It anastomoses with the posterior interosseous artery in the posterior compartment of the forearm, and travels through a tunnel under the extensor retinaculum with the tendons of the digital extensors before joining the dorsal carpal arch. Three small cutaneous perforating branches supply the skin over the lower lateral border of the forearm.</div></section><section><a id="s1925"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1545">Posterior interosseous artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2370">The posterior interosseous artery arises from the common interosseous artery and is usually smaller than the anterior interosseous artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0055">Figs 50.10</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000501/B9780702077050000501.xhtml#f0150">50.27A</a>). It passes dorsally between the oblique cord and proximal border of the interosseous membrane, and then between supinator and abductor pollicis longus. It descends deep in the groove between extensor carpi ulnaris and the extensor digiti minimi component of extensor digitorum. While in the groove, it gives rise to multiple muscular branches that supply these muscles and fasciocutaneous perforators that travel in the intermuscular septum between extensor carpi ulnaris and extensor digiti minimi. The posterior interosseous artery accompanies the deep branch of the radial nerve (posterior interosseous nerve) on abductor pollicis longus. Distally, it anastomoses with the terminal part of the anterior interosseous artery and the dorsal carpal arch.</div><div class="text" id="p2375">Sometimes, the posterior interosseous artery disappears halfway down the forearm, in which case the anterior interosseous artery pierces the interosseous membrane more proximally to anastomose with it. Occasionally the two vessels do not anastomose.</div><section><a id="s1930"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1550">Posterior interosseous recurrent artery</p><div class="textfl" id="p2380">The posterior interosseous recurrent artery leaves the posterior interosseous artery near its origin and ascends between the lateral epicondyle and olecranon, either on or through supinator, and deep to anconeus. It anastomoses with the middle collateral branch of the profunda brachii artery, posterior ulnar recurrent artery and ulnar collateral artery. Occasionally the artery is absent.</div></section><section><a id="s1935"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1555">Dorsal cutaneous branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p2385">A constant dorso-ulnar perforator vessel is given off distally. It arises 2–5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm proximal to the pisiform and accompanies the dorsal cutaneous branch of the ulnar nerve. It emerges between flexor carpi ulnaris and extensor carpi ulnaris.</div></section><section><a id="s1940"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1560">Palmar carpal branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p2390">The palmar carpal branch crosses the distal ulna deep to the tendons of flexor digitorum profundus and anastomoses with the palmar carpal branch of the radial artery to make a palmar radiocarpal arch.</div></section><section><a id="s1945"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1565">Dorsal carpal branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p2395">The dorsal carpal branch arises just proximal to the pisiform. It curves deep to the tendon of flexor carpi ulnaris to reach the carpal dorsum, which it crosses laterally beneath the extensor tendons. It anastomoses with the dorsal carpal branch of the radial artery to complete the dorsal carpal arch. Near its origin, it sends a small digital branch along the ulnar side of the fifth metacarpal to supply the medial side of the dorsal surface of the fifth finger.</div></section><section><a id="s1950"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1570">Deep palmar branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p2400">The deep palmar branch is often double. It passes between abductor and flexor digiti minimi, through or deep to opponens digiti minimi, and anastomoses with the radial artery, completing the deep palmar arch. The deep palmar branch accompanies the deep branch of the ulnar nerve.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1955"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1575">Superficial palmar arch</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2405">The superficial palmar arch is an anastomosis fed mainly by the ulnar artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513.xhtml#f0170">Figs 51.2A</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513.xhtml#f0175">51.10</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513_split_a.xhtml#f0160">51.36</a>). The latter enters the palm with the ulnar nerve, anterior to the flexor retinaculum and lateral to the pisiform. It passes medial to the hook of the hamate, then curves laterally to form an arch that is convex distally and level with a transverse line through the distal border of the fully extended base of the thumb. About one-third of superficial palmar arches are formed by the ulnar artery alone, a further third are completed by the superficial palmar branch of the radial artery, and a third by the arteria radialis indicis, or a branch of either arteria princeps pollicis or the median artery. The superficial palmar arch is covered by palmaris brevis and the palmar aponeurosis, and it is superficial to flexor digiti minimi, branches of the median nerve and the tendons of the long flexors and the lumbricals.</div><section><a id="s1960"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1580">Common and proper palmar digital arteries</p><div class="textfl" id="p2410">Three common palmar digital arteries arise from the convexity of the superficial palmar arch (see <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513.xhtml#f0170">Fig. 51.2A</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513_split_a.xhtml#f0160">51.36</a>). They pass distally on the second to fourth lumbricals, each joined by a corresponding palmar metacarpal artery from the deep palmar arch, and divide into two proper palmar digital arteries. These run along the contiguous sides of all four fingers, dorsal to the digital nerves, between Grayson’s and Cleland’s ligaments, anastomosing in the subcutaneous tissue of the fingertips and near the interphalangeal joints. Each digital artery has two dorsal branches that anastomose with the dorsal digital arteries and supply the soft parts dorsal to the middle and distal phalanges, including the matrices of the nails (see <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513.xhtml#f0170">Fig. 51.2B</a>). The palmar digital artery for the medial side of the little finger leaves the arch under palmaris brevis. Palmar digital arteries supply the metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joints and nutrient rami to the phalanges. They are the main digital supply because the dorsal digital arteries are minute. The origins of the palmar digital arteries of the thumb are quite variable. Both may arise from a single arteria princeps pollicis or they may arise separately from the superficial palmar arch. The ulnar digital artery may arise from the first dorsal metacarpal artery.</div><div class="text" id="p2415">The terminal branches of the digital arteries contribute to a number of vascular arcades that provide a rich vascular supply for the distal elements of each digit (see <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513.xhtml#f0170">Fig. 51.2A</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000513/B9780702077050000513.xhtml#f0025">51.5</a>). Three distal phalangeal dorsal arterial arcades anastomose with each other and with those from the other side of the digit. The superficial arcade occurs at the level of the proximal nail fold and is supplied primarily by a dorsal branch from the palmar digital artery, which is given off at the level of the middle phalanx. The proximal subungual arcade is at the level of the lunula and is supplied by a terminal branch of the digital artery, which passes dorsally. The distal subungual arcade occurs more distally in the nail bed. It is supplied by a dorsal vessel that emerges from the point of confluence of the ‘H’-shaped anastomosis between the terminal portions of both digital arteries, and passes from the volar to the dorsal aspect of the digit under the interosseous ligament connecting the proximal and distal parts of the distal phalanx.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s1965"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1585">Variants</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2420">The ulnar and radial arteries to the hand may occasionally be supplemented by a median artery that contributes to, or supplies, the superficial palmar arch and by the anterior interosseous artery, which may make a contribution to the deep palmar arch. The median artery may persist in two different forms, palmar and antebrachial (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib255" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_255">Rodriguez-Niedenführ et al 1999</a>). The palmar type arises from the junction of the <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E94" id="pagebreak_1.464E94"/><a id="pg1464.e92"/>ulnar artery and its common interosseous trunk; it is long and large, and reaches the palm, usually ending as the first or second common digital artery, or both. The antebrachial type is slender and short, usually arising from the anterior interosseous artery and finishing in the forearm. These variations are seen in about 20% of individuals and tend to be unilateral. Ulnar artery dominance in all digits is rare, complete radial artery dominance has been described in 28% of hands (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib146" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_146">Kleinert et al 1989</a>).</div></section></section><section><a id="s1970"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle1590">Collateral circulation at the elbow</h4><div class="textfl" id="p2425">The collateral circulation at the elbow is more robust than that at the knee. Alternative pathways include the profunda brachii artery, which accompanies the radial nerve through the lateral intermuscular septum to become the radial collateral artery. The superior ulnar collateral artery accompanies the ulnar nerve: in the adult, it may be as wide as 1.5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm at its origin; hence its regular use as the artery to a free vascularized ulnar nerve graft. The inferior ulnar collateral artery is regularly seen during medial approaches to the elbow as a vessel that pierces the intermuscular septum to curl around the humerus between triceps and bone. On occasion, there is a substantial artery running with the median nerve. These vessels anastomose with recurrent branches from the ulnar and radial arteries to form a network that may maintain perfusion of the hand and the extensor muscles in cases where the brachial artery has been divided in the lower third of the arm (when there is no associated fracture or dislocation). Collateral circulation will diminish or cease altogether if the ulnar or radial nerve is entrapped within the fracture or compressed by haematoma (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib34" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_34">Blakey et al 2009</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib33" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Birch 2011</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s1975"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle1595">Cutaneous vascular supply of the upper limb</h4><div class="textfl" id="p2430">The skin over the lateral end of the clavicle is supplied by the supraclavicular artery, which pierces the deep fascia superior to the clavicle and anterior to trapezius. In most cases, this artery arises from the superficial cervical/transverse cervical artery, but it occasionally arises from the suprascapular artery. The area over deltoid is supplied by the anterior and posterior circumflex humeral arteries. The deltoid branch of the thoraco-acromial axis contributes to the blood supply of the anterior aspect of the shoulder via musculocutaneous perforators through deltoid.</div><div class="text" id="p2435">The blood supply to the skin of the upper arm may be divided into three regions with separate supplies. The deltoid region is supplied by musculocutaneous perforators, and the medial and lateral regions are supplied by fasciocutaneous perforators (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib57" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_57">Cormack and Lamberty 1994</a>, Salmon, in <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib298" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_298">Taylor and Razaboni 1994</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p2440">The deltoid region is supplied by the posterior circumflex humeral artery via musculocutaneous perforators. After exiting from the quadrangular space, it gives off a descending branch that runs down to the insertion of deltoid and the overlying skin, and an ascending branch that passes superiorly towards the acromion and pierces the edge of deltoid and the deep fascia to fan out and supply the overlying skin.</div><div class="text" id="p2445">The medial side of the upper arm is supplied by five or six fasciocutaneous perforators that arise from the brachial artery, the superior ulnar collateral artery and, if present, the single artery to biceps brachii. These perforators pass along the medial intermuscular septum to spread out in the deep fascia and anastomose with perforating vessels superiorly and inferiorly, and from the lateral side. There are virtually no musculocutaneous perforators through biceps or triceps.</div><div class="text" id="p2450">The lateral side of the upper arm below deltoid is supplied by perforating vessels from the middle collateral and radial collateral arteries (the terminating bifurcation of the profunda brachii). The middle collateral artery sends perforators to the skin via the lateral intermuscular septum between brachioradialis and triceps, while the radial collateral artery gives off cutaneous perforators via the intermuscular septum between brachialis and brachioradialis. These cutaneous vessels anastomose with those from the medial side.</div><div class="text" id="p2455">The skin of the elbow and forearm receives its blood supply from muscle perforators, fasciocutaneous networks and direct cutaneous vessels. The skin of the anterolateral cubital fossa is supplied by muscle perforators arising from the radial collateral and radial recurrent arteries. The skin of the medial cubital fossa receives branches from an anastomosis between the inferior ulnar collateral and the ulnar recurrent arteries. Small direct cutaneous vessels spring from the brachial artery. The skin of the posterolateral aspect of the elbow is supplied by branches of the posterior interosseous recurrent artery and a rich plexus of collateral and anastomosing arteries. The skin of the posteromedial aspect is supplied by branches of the superior and inferior ulnar collateral arteries and the posterior ulnar recurrent artery feeding into the plexus.</div><div class="text" id="p2460">The skin of the anterior forearm is supplied by fasciocutaneous perforators; the largest is the inferior cubital artery, which arises from the radial artery at the distal apex of the cubital fossa and extends to midway down the forearm. Fasciocutaneous perforators from the radial artery supply the lateral two-thirds of the anterior surface of the forearm (see <a href="../B9780702077050000483/B9780702077050000483.xhtml#f0040">Fig. 48.5</a>). The vessels pass in the intermuscular septa between brachioradialis and flexor carpi radialis, and between flexor carpi radialis and flexor digitorum superficialis. Fasciocutaneous perforators from the ulnar artery supply skin over the ulnar side of the anterior forearm and the medial quarter of the posterior forearm from the cubital fossa to the wrist. A small contribution comes from musculocutaneous perforators that pass through brachioradialis and flexor carpi ulnaris.</div><div class="text" id="p2465">The skin of the distal third of the lateral forearm is supplied by the terminal perforating branches of the anterior interosseous artery. The central half of the posterior surface of the forearm, from the lateral edge of extensor digitorum, just below the lateral epicondyle of the humerus, to the wrist, is supplied by fasciocutaneous perforators from the posterior interosseous artery that pass along the intermuscular fascia between extensor carpi ulnaris and extensor digiti minimi.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1980"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle1600">Arterial Supply of the Lower Limb</h3><div class="textfl" id="p2470">The femoral artery provides the principal arterial supply to the lower limb distal to the inguinal ligament and the gluteal fold. It courses within the subsartorial (adductor) canal, which is located on the anteromedial aspect of the thigh, passes through the adductor hiatus and becomes the popliteal artery on entering the posterior compartment of the thigh. The popliteal artery soon divides into the anterior and posterior tibial arteries which supply the leg, ankle and foot.</div><div class="text" id="p2475">The obturator and inferior gluteal vessels also contribute to the supply of the proximal part of the lower limb. In the embryo, the inferior gluteal artery supplies the main axial artery of the limb, which is represented in the adult by the artery to the sciatic nerve.</div><div class="text" id="p2480">The bones of the lower limb receive their arterial supply from nutrient vessels, metaphysial arterial branches of the peri-articular anastomoses, and the arteries supplying the muscles that attach to their periosteum. The pattern of arterial supply is particularly relevant to fracture healing, the spread of infection and malignancy, and the planning of reconstructive surgical procedures. For further details, consult <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib57" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Cormack and Lamberty (1994)</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib298" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Taylor and Razaboni (1994)</a> and <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib62" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_62">Crock (1996)</a>.</div><div class="text" id="p2485">Ischaemia of the lower limb due to peripheral arterial disease is a tremendous burden on healthcare resources. Obesity and smoking and diseases including diabetes, hypertension and atherosclerosis, contribute to this pathology. Symptoms include intermittent claudication and wounds that do not heal well (see <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib266" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_266">Sampson et al 2017</a>). Physical examination of such patients may reveal decreased distal pulses (e.g. of the posterior tibial artery), pallor or a cool extremity.</div><section><a id="s1985"/><section><a id="s1990"/><section><a id="s1995"/><section><a id="s2000"/><section><a id="s2005"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1605">Pulses</p><div class="textfl" id="p2490">The pulsation of the femoral artery is palpable as it enters the femoral triangle. Posterior to the knee joint, the popliteal pulse is difficult to identify due to the depth of the popliteal artery, and is best assessed with the knee in slight flexion. Distally, the posterior tibial artery is palpable just posterior to the medial malleolus and the dorsalis pedis pulse is located over the tarsal bones, immediately lateral to the tendon of extensor hallucis longus. Clinical signs of decreased or absent peripheral pulses, particularly the pedal pulses (posterior tibial artery and dorsalis pedis) bilaterally may be indicative of peripheral artery disease (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib163" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_163">Londero et al 2016</a>).</div></section></section></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s2010"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle1610">Femoral artery</h3><div class="textfl" id="p2495">The femoral artery (see <a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X.xhtml#f0170">Figs 77.2</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X_split_a.xhtml#f0280">77.43</a>–<a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X_split_a.xhtml#f0135">77.44</a>. 77.48) is a continuation of the external iliac artery (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib19" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_19">Benninger 2014</a>) and provides the principal arterial supply to the lower limb distal to the inguinal ligament and the gluteal fold (see <a href="../B9780702077050000768/B9780702077050000768.xhtml#f0020">Figs 76.4</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000768/B9780702077050000768.xhtml#f0025">76.5</a>). It begins posterior to the inguinal ligament, midway between the anterior superior iliac spine and the pubic symphysis, descends along the anteromedial part of the thigh in the femoral triangle, enters and passes through the adductor (subsartorial) canal, and becomes the popliteal artery as it passes through an opening in adductor magnus near the junction of the middle and distal thirds of the thigh. Its first 3 or 4<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm are enclosed, with the femoral vein, in the femoral sheath. The femoral artery gives off several branches in the proximal thigh, including the superficial epigastric, superficial circumflex iliac, superficial external pudendal, deep external pudendal <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E95" id="pagebreak_1.464E95"/><a id="pg1464.e93"/>and the profunda femoris artery. It gives off the descending genicular artery within the adductor canal.</div><div class="text" id="p2500">Rarely the femoral artery divides, distal to the origin of the profunda femoris artery, into two trunks that reunite near the adductor opening. The inferior gluteal artery, accompanying the sciatic nerve to the popliteal fossa and representing a persistence of the original axial artery, may replace it. The external iliac artery is then small, ending as the deep artery of the thigh.</div><section><a id="s8015"/><section><a id="s2015"/><section><a id="s2020"/><section><a id="s2025"/><section><a id="s2030"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1615">Relations</p><div class="textfl" id="p2505">Anterior to the artery in the femoral triangle are the skin, subcutaneous tissue, superficial inguinal lymph nodes, fascia lata, femoral sheath, superficial circumflex iliac vein (crossing in the subcutaneous tissue) and the femoral branch of the genitofemoral nerve (which is at first lateral and then anterior). Near the apex of the triangle, the medial femoral cutaneous nerve crosses in front of the artery from the lateral to the medial side. Posteriorly, the posterior wall of the femoral sheath separates the artery from the tendons of psoas, pectineus and adductor longus. The artery is separated from the hip joint by the tendon of psoas major, from pectineus by the femoral vein and deep femoral vessels, and from adductor longus by the femoral vein. Proximally, the nerve to pectineus passes medially behind the artery. The femoral nerve lies lateral to the artery, outside the femoral sheath. The femoral vein is medial to the artery in the proximal part of the triangle and becomes posterior distally at the apex.</div><div class="text" id="p2510">Within the adductor canal, the artery is covered by skin, subcutaneous tissue, deep fascia, sartorius and the fibrous roof (subsartorial fascia) of the canal. The saphenous nerve lies at first lateral, then anterior and finally medial to the artery. Adductor longus and adductor magnus are posterior, vastus medialis and its nerve are anterolateral, and the femoral vein is also posterior proximally but it becomes lateral distally (see <a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X_split_a.xhtml#f0140">Figs 77.48</a>–<a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X_split_a.xhtml#f0155">77.49</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p2515">Compression of the femoral artery is most effective just distal to the inguinal ligament, where it is superficial and separated from the bone (iliopubic ramus) only by the psoas major tendon. For this reason, arterial injury proximal to the inguinal ligament, such as laceration by a knife, cannot be controlled simply by compression. Gaining proximal control of bleeding involves major exposure of the more proximal arteries as a life-saving manoeuvre.</div><div class="text" id="p2520">The branches of the femoral artery include the superficial epigastric, superficial circumflex iliac, superficial external pudendal, deep external pudendal arteries, muscular branches, the profunda femoris artery and the descending genicular artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000768/B9780702077050000768.xhtml#f0025">Fig. 76.4</a>).</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s2035"/><h4 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1620">Superficial epigastric artery</h4><div class="textfl" id="p2525">The superficial epigastric artery arises anteriorly from the femoral artery approximately 1<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm distal to the inguinal ligament, and traverses the cribriform fascia to ascend anterior to the ligament and run in the abdominal subcutaneous tissue almost to the umbilicus. It supplies the superficial inguinal lymph nodes, subcutaneous tissue and skin, and anastomoses with branches of the inferior epigastric artery and its contralateral fellow.</div></section><section><a id="s2040"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1625">Superficial circumflex iliac artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2530">The superficial circumflex iliac artery is the smallest superficial branch of the femoral artery and arises near or with the superficial epigastric artery. It usually emerges through the fascia lata, lateral to the saphenous opening, and turns laterally distal to the inguinal ligament towards the anterior superior iliac spine. It supplies the skin, subcutaneous tissue and superficial inguinal lymph nodes, anastomosing with the deep circumflex iliac, superior gluteal and lateral circumflex femoral arteries.</div><div class="text" id="p2535">The superficial circumflex iliac artery is the basis for the important axial-pattern pedicled groin skin flap. Free flaps based on the vessel may also be raised.</div></section><section><a id="s2045"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1630">Superficial external pudendal artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2540">The superficial external pudendal artery arises medially from the femoral artery, close to the preceding branches. Emerging from the cribriform fascia, it passes medially, usually deep to the long saphenous vein, across the spermatic cord (or round ligament) to supply the lower abdominal, penile, scrotal or labial skin, and anastomoses with branches of the internal pudendal artery. The anterior scrotal wall is supplied primarily by branches of the external pudendal artery, which run parallel to the rugae and do not cross the raphe of the scrotum; this anatomical detail is important for planning appropriate incisions during scrotal surgery.</div></section><section><a id="s2050"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1635">Deep external pudendal artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2545">The deep external pudendal artery passes medially across pectineus and anterior or posterior to adductor longus, covered by fascia lata, which it pierces to supply the skin of the perineum and scrotum or labium majus. Its branches anastomose with the posterior scrotal or labial branches of the internal pudendal artery.</div></section><section><a id="s2055"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1640">Muscular branches</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2550">Muscular branches supply sartorius, vastus medialis and the adductors.</div></section><section><a id="s2060"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1645">Profunda femoris artery (deep artery of the thigh)</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2555">The profunda femoris artery (see <a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X_split_a.xhtml#f0120">Figs 77.40B</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X_split_a.xhtml#f0280">77.43A</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X_split_a.xhtml#f0140">77.48</a>–<a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X_split_a.xhtml#f0155">77.49</a>) is a large branch that arises posterolaterally from the femoral artery about 3.5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm distal to the inguinal ligament. At first lateral to the femoral artery, it spirals posterior to this and the femoral vein to reach the medial side of the femur. It passes between pectineus and adductor longus, then between the latter and adductor brevis, before it descends between adductor longus and adductor magnus. It pierces adductor magnus and anastomoses with the upper muscular branches of the popliteal artery. This terminal part is sometimes named the fourth perforating artery.</div><div class="text" id="p2560">The profunda femoris artery is the main supply to the adductor, extensor and flexor muscles, and also anastomoses with the internal and external iliac arteries above and with the popliteal artery below. It is a major collateral artery of the lower limb in patients with femoropopliteal arterial occlusive disease (see <a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X_split_a.xhtml#f0155">Fig. 77.49</a>) (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib273" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_273">Shakeri et al 2010</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p2565">The profunda femoris artery sometimes arises from the posterior aspect of the femoral artery, and more rarely from the medial aspect. If it arises posteriorly, it may cross anterior to the femoral vein and then pass backwards around its medial side.</div><div class="text" id="p2570">The profunda femoris artery gives off the lateral and medial circumflex arteries in the proximal thigh, and perforating and muscular branches more distally.</div><section><a id="s2065"/><section><a id="s2070"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1650">Relations</p><div class="textfl" id="p2575">Posteriorly, in proximodistal order, lie iliacus, pectineus, adductor brevis and adductor magnus. Anteriorly, the femoral and deep femoral veins, and distally, adductor longus, separate the profunda femoris artery from the femoral artery. Laterally, vastus medialis separates the proximal part of the artery from the femur.</div></section></section><section><a id="s2085"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1665">Lateral circumflex femoral artery</p><div class="textfl" id="p2595">The lateral circumflex femoral artery (see <a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X_split_a.xhtml#f0140">Figs 77.48</a>–<a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X_split_a.xhtml#f0155">77.49</a>) is a laterally running branch given off near the root of the profunda femoris artery. It passes between the divisions of the femoral nerve, posterior to sartorius and rectus femoris, and divides into ascending, transverse and descending branches. The ascending branch ascends along the intertrochanteric line, under tensor fasciae latae, lateral to the hip joint. It anastomoses with the superior gluteal and deep circumflex iliac arteries, supplying the greater trochanter, and, with branches of the medial circumflex femoral, forms an anastomotic ring round the femoral neck, from which the femoral neck and head are supplied. The ascending branch forms the pedicle of the tensor fasciae latae musculocutaneous flap. The descending branch descends posterior to rectus femoris, along the anterior border of vastus lateralis, which it supplies; a long branch descends in vastus lateralis to the knee (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib297" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_297">Tayfur et al 2010</a>), anastomosing with the superior lateral genicular branch of the popliteal artery, accompanied by the nerve to vastus lateralis. The fasciocutaneous perforators that arise from the descending branch supply the anterolateral thigh fasciocutaneous flap. The transverse branch, the smallest, passes laterally anterior to vastus intermedius and pierces vastus lateralis to wind round the femur, just distal to the greater trochanter. It anastomoses with the medial circumflex, inferior gluteal and first perforating arteries, forming a cruciate anastomosis.</div><div class="text" id="p2600">The lateral circumflex femoral artery may arise from the femoral artery or as a common trunk with the profunda femoris artery and the medial circumflex femoral artery. The ascending and descending branches may occasionally arise separately (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib274" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_274">Siddharth et al 1985</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s2075"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1655">Medial circumflex femoral artery</p><div class="textfl" id="p2580">The medial circumflex femoral artery (see <a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X_split_a.xhtml#f0140">Figs 77.48</a>–<a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X_split_a.xhtml#f0155">77.49</a>) usually originates from the posteromedial aspect of the profunda femoris artery, but sometimes originates from the femoral artery itself or as a common trunk with either the profunda femoris artery or the lateral circumflex femoral artery or both (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib274" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Siddharth et al 1985</a>). It supplies the adductor muscles and curves medially round the femur between pectineus and psoas major and then obturator externus and adductor brevis, finally appearing between quadratus femoris and the upper border of adductor magnus, dividing into transverse and ascending branches. The transverse branch takes part in the cruciate anastomosis. The ascending branch ascends on the tendon of obturator externus, anterior to quadratus femoris, to the trochanteric fossa, where it <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E96" id="pagebreak_1.464E96"/><a id="pg1464.e94"/>anastomoses with branches of the gluteal and lateral circumflex femoral arteries. An acetabular branch at the proximal edge of adductor brevis enters the hip joint under the transverse acetabular ligament with one from the obturator artery. It supplies the fat in the fossa and reaches the femoral head along its ligament. For details of the blood supply of the proximal end of the femur consult <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib62" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Crock (1996)</a>.</div></section><section><a id="s2080"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1660">Perforating arteries</p><div class="textfl" id="p2585">The perforating arteries (see <a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X_split_a.xhtml#f0120">Fig. 77.40A</a>) perforate the femoral attachment of adductor magnus to reach the flexor aspect of the thigh. There are three perforating branches, and the terminal part of the profunda femoris artery itself becomes the fourth perforator. They pass close to the linea aspera under small tendinous arches and give off muscular, cutaneous and anastomotic branches. Diminished, they pass deep to the short head of biceps femoris (the first usually through the attachment of gluteus maximus), traverse the lateral intermuscular septum and enter vastus lateralis. The first arises proximal, the second anterior and the third distal to adductor brevis. The first perforating artery passes back between pectineus and adductor brevis (sometimes through the latter), pierces adductor magnus near the linea aspera to supply adductor brevis, adductor magnus, biceps femoris and gluteus maximus, and anastomoses with the inferior gluteal, medial and lateral circumflex femoral and second perforating arteries. The larger second perforating artery, often arising with the first, pierces the attachments of adductor brevis and magnus, divides into the ascending and descending branches supplying the posterior thigh muscles and anastomoses with the first and third perforating arteries. The femoral nutrient artery usually arises from it. When two nutrient arteries exist, they usually arise from the first and third perforators. The third perforating artery starts distal to adductor brevis, pierces the attachment of adductor magnus and divides into branches to the posterior thigh muscles. It anastomoses proximally with the perforating arteries, and distally with the end of the profunda femoris artery and muscular branches of the popliteal. The femoral nutrient artery may arise from it. Side branches of the diaphysial nutrient and other branches of the profunda femoris artery provide subsidiary cortical arteries.</div><div class="text" id="p2590">The perforating arteries form a double chain of anastomoses, initially in the adductor muscles and subsequently near the linea aspera.</div></section><section><a id="s2090"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1670">Muscular branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p2605">Numerous muscular branches arise from the profunda femoris artery. Some end in the adductors, and others pierce adductor magnus, supply the flexors and anastomose with the medial circumflex femoral artery and superior muscular branches of the popliteal artery. The profunda femoris artery is thus the main supply to the thigh muscles.</div></section></section><section><a id="s2095"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1675">Descending genicular artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2610">The descending genicular artery (see <a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X_split_a.xhtml#f0140">Figs 77.48</a>–<a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X_split_a.xhtml#f0155">77.49</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000781/B9780702077050000781.xhtml#f0010">Fig 78.1</a>), the distal branch of the femoral artery, arises just proximal to the adductor opening and immediately supplies a saphenous branch. It then descends in vastus medialis, anterior to the tendon of adductor magnus, to the medial side of the knee, where it anastomoses with the superior medial genicular artery. Muscular branches supply vastus medialis and adductor magnus, and give off articular branches that anastomose around the knee joint. One articular branch crosses above the femoral patellar surface, forming an arch with the superior lateral genicular artery and supplying the knee joint. The saphenous branch (saphenous artery) emerges distally through the roof of the adductor canal to accompany the saphenous nerve to the medial side of the knee. It passes between sartorius and gracilis, and supplies the skin of the proximomedial area of the leg; it anastomoses with the inferior medial genicular artery.</div></section></section><section><a id="s2100"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1680">Arterial anastomoses around the hip and thigh</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2615">In the fetus, a peri-acetabular vascular circle formed by the superior and inferior gluteal, internal pudendal and obturator arteries reduces the risk of bony necrosis of this region in children. However, there is a zone at the anterior portion of the acetabulum where the blood supply is less abundant (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib63a" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_63a">Damsin et al 1992</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p2620">An important chain of anastomoses extends on the back of the thigh from the gluteal region to the popliteal fossa. It is formed in proximodistal order by anastomoses between the gluteal arteries and terminal branches of the medial circumflex femoral artery; the circumflex femoral arteries and the first perforating artery; the perforating arteries themselves; and between the fourth perforating artery and the superior muscular branches of the popliteal artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000768/B9780702077050000768.xhtml#f0025">Fig. 76.4</a>). The trochanteric and cruciate anastomoses are the proximal elements of this chain.</div><section><a id="s2105"/><section><a id="s2110"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1685">Trochanteric anastomosis</p><div class="textfl" id="p2625">The so-called trochanteric anastomosis lies near the trochanteric fossa of the femur and is an anastomosis between the ascending branch of the medial circumflex femoral artery and descending branches of the superior and inferior gluteal arteries. The lateral circumflex femoral artery and the first perforating artery from the profunda femoris artery may also contribute, creating an extracapsular ‘arterial ring of the femoral neck’ (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib62" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Crock 1996</a>). Branches from this ring, the retinacular vessels, pierce the capsule and ascend along the femoral neck to give the main blood supply to the head of the femur.</div></section><section><a id="s2115"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1690">Cruciate anastomosis</p><div class="textfl" id="p2630">The cruciate anastomosis lies at the level of the lesser trochanter, near the lower edge of the femoral attachment of quadratus femoris, and is an anastomosis between the transverse branches of the medial and lateral circumflex femoral arteries, a descending branch of the inferior gluteal artery and an ascending branch from the first perforating artery.</div></section><section><a id="s2120"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1695">Collateral circulation in proximal femoral artery occlusion</p><div class="textfl" id="p2635">After occlusion of the femoral artery proximal to the origin of the profunda femoris artery, five main anastomotic channels are available. These are between branches of the superior and inferior gluteal arteries, the medial and lateral circumflex femoral arteries and the first perforating branch of the profunda femoris artery; the obturator branch of the internal iliac artery and the medial circumflex femoral artery; the internal pudendal branch of the internal iliac artery and the superficial and deep external pudendal branches of the femoral artery; a deep circumflex iliac branch of the external iliac artery, the lateral circumflex femoral branch of the deep artery of the thigh and the superficial circumflex iliac branch of the femoral artery; and the inferior gluteal branch of the internal iliac artery and perforating branches of the profunda femoris artery.</div></section></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s2125"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle1700">Popliteal artery</h3><div class="textfl" id="p2640">The popliteal artery is the continuation of the femoral artery and crosses the popliteal fossa (see <a href="../B9780702077050000781/B9780702077050000781.xhtml#f0010">Figs 78.1B</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000781/B9780702077050000781.xhtml#f0015">78.2</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000781/B9780702077050000781.xhtml#f0025">78.4</a>). It descends laterally from the opening in adductor magnus to the femoral intercondylar fossa, inclining obliquely to the distal border of popliteus, where it divides into the anterior and posterior tibial arteries. This division usually occurs at the proximal end of the interosseous space between the wide tibial metaphysis and the slender fibular metaphysis. The artery is relatively tethered at the adductor hiatus and again distally by the fascia related to soleus, and is therefore susceptible to damage following knee injuries, e.g. dislocation. Aneurysms of the popliteal artery are not uncommon.</div><div class="text" id="p2645">The popliteal artery may occasionally bifurcate more superiorly and divide into its terminal branches proximal to popliteus, or it may trifurcate into anterior and posterior tibial and fibular arteries. Either the anterior tibial or the posterior tibial artery may be reduced or increased in size. The size of the fibular artery is usually inversely related to the size of the anterior and posterior tibial arteries. Rarely the anterior tibial artery is the source of the fibular artery, a variation that is almost always associated with a high bifurcation of the popliteal artery. The popliteal and inferior gluteal arteries may be joined by a large anastomotic vessel; in such cases, the femoral artery is hypoplastic (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib138" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_138">Kawashima and Sasaki 2010</a>). When this occurs, the popliteal artery usually has an abnormal relationship to popliteus, running deep to the muscle before dividing into its terminal branches. The popliteal artery may pass medially beneath the medial head of gastrocnemius, or may pass beneath an aberrant band of muscle in the popliteal fossa; in either case, contraction of the muscles may occlude the artery, a condition that may present with claudication on exertion. The popliteal vein is usually superficial and adjacent to the artery, but it may run deep to the artery, or be separated from it by a slip of muscle derived from the medial head of gastrocnemius.</div><section><a id="s2130"/><section><a id="s7130"/><section><a id="s2135"/><section><a id="s2140"/><section><a id="s2145"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1705">Relations</p><div class="textfl" id="p2650">Anteriorly, from proximal to distal, are fat covering the femoral popliteal surface, the capsule of the knee joint, and the fascia of popliteus. Posteriorly are semimembranosus (proximally) and gastrocnemius and plantaris (distally). In between, the artery is separated from the skin and fasciae by fat and crossed from its lateral to its medial side by the tibial nerve and popliteal vein; the vein lies between the nerve and artery and is adherent to the latter. Laterally are biceps femoris, the tibial nerve, popliteal vein and lateral femoral condyle (all proximal), and plantaris and the lateral head of gastrocnemius (distal). Medially are semimembranosus and the medial femoral condyle (proximal), and the tibial nerve, popliteal vein and medial head of gastrocnemius (distally). The relations of the popliteal nodes are described below.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s2150"/><h4 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1710">Superior genicular arteries</h4><div class="textfl" id="p2655">The superior genicular arteries branch from the popliteal artery, curving round proximal to both femoral condyles to reach the anterior aspect <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E97" id="pagebreak_1.464E97"/><a id="pg1464.e95"/>of the knee. The superior medial genicular artery lies under semimembranosus and semitendinosus, proximal to the medial head of gastrocnemius and deep to the tendon of adductor magnus. It divides into a branch to vastus medialis that anastomoses with the descending genicular and inferior medial genicular arteries, and a branch that ramifies on the femur and anastomoses with the superior lateral genicular artery. Its size varies inversely with that of the descending genicular artery. The superior lateral genicular artery passes under the tendon of biceps femoris, pierces the lateral intermuscular septum and divides into superficial and deep branches. The superficial branch supplies vastus lateralis and anastomoses with the descending branch of the lateral circumflex femoral and inferior lateral genicular arteries, while the deep branch anastomoses with the superior medial genicular artery, forming an anterior arch across the femur with the descending genicular artery. The superficial branch is vulnerable if the lateral patellar retinaculum is divided surgically.</div></section><section><a id="s2155"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1715">Middle genicular artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2660">The middle genicular artery is small. It arises from the popliteal artery near the midpoint of the posterior aspect of the knee joint. It pierces the oblique popliteal ligament to supply the cruciate ligaments and synovial membrane.</div></section><section><a id="s2160"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1720">Inferior genicular arteries</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2665">The inferior medial and lateral genicular arteries arise from the popliteal artery deep to gastrocnemius. The inferior medial genicular artery is deep to the medial head of gastrocnemius. It descends along the proximal margin of popliteus, which it supplies; passes inferior to the medial tibial condyle, under the tibial collateral ligament; and then ascends anteromedial to the knee joint at the anterior border of the tibial collateral ligament. It supplies the joint and the tibia, and anastomoses with the inferior lateral and superior medial genicular arteries and with the anterior tibial recurrent artery and saphenous branch of the descending genicular artery. The inferior lateral genicular artery runs laterally across popliteus and forwards over the head of the fibula to the front of the knee joint, passing under the lateral head of gastrocnemius, the fibular collateral ligament and the tendon of biceps femoris. Its branches anastomose with the inferior medial and superior lateral genicular arteries; anterior and posterior tibial recurrent arteries; and the circumflex fibular branch of the posterior tibial artery.</div></section><section><a id="s2165"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1725">Cutaneous branches: the superficial sural arteries</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2670">The superficial sural arteries are three vessels that leave the popliteal artery, or its side branches, descend between the heads of gastrocnemius and perforate the deep fascia to supply the skin on the back of the leg. The central or median vessel is usually larger than the medial or lateral vessels, and usually accompanies the sural nerve.</div><div class="text" id="p2675">Fasciocutaneous free and pedicled flaps may be raised on the superficial sural arteries.</div></section><section><a id="s2170"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1730">Superior muscular branches</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2680">The superior muscular branches are two or three vessels that arise proximally and pass to adductor magnus and the posterior thigh muscles. They anastomose with the termination of the profunda femoris artery.</div></section><section><a id="s2175"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1735">Sural arteries</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2685">The two sural arteries are large and arise behind the knee joint to supply gastrocnemius, soleus and plantaris. They are used in gastrocnemius musculocutaneous flaps.</div></section></section><section><a id="s2180"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1740">Genicular anastomosis</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2690">There is an intricate arterial anastomosis around the patella and femoral and tibial condyles (see <a href="../B9780702077050000781/B9780702077050000781.xhtml#f0010">Fig. 78.1</a>). A superficial network spreads between the fascia and skin around the patella and in the fat deep to the patellar ligament. A deep network lies on the femur and tibia near their adjoining articular surfaces, and supplies the bone, articular capsule and synovial membrane. The vessels involved in this anastomosis are the superior medial and lateral genicular; inferior medial and lateral genicular; descending genicular; descending branch of the lateral circumflex femoral; circumflex fibular; and anterior and posterior tibial recurrent arteries.</div></section></section><section><a id="s2185"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle1745">Anterior tibial artery</h4><div class="textfl" id="p2695">The anterior tibial artery arises at the distal border of popliteus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000768/B9780702077050000768.xhtml#f0020">Figs 76.4A–B</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000781/B9780702077050000781.xhtml#f0010">78.1</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000781/B9780702077050000781.xhtml#f0025">78.4</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000781/B9780702077050000781.xhtml#f0180">78.36</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000781/B9780702077050000781.xhtml#f0195">78.39</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000781/B9780702077050000781.xhtml#f0200">78.40</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000793/B9780702077050000793.xhtml#f0050">79.10A</a>). At first in the flexor compartment, it passes between the heads of tibialis posterior and through the oval aperture in the proximal part of the interosseous membrane to reach the extensor (anterior) compartment, passing medial to the fibular neck; it is vulnerable here during tibial osteotomy. Descending on the anterior aspect of the membrane, it approaches the tibia and, distally, lies anterior to it. At the ankle, the anterior tibial artery is located approximately midway between the malleoli, and it continues on the dorsum of the foot, lateral to extensor hallucis longus, as the dorsalis pedis artery.</div><div class="text" id="p2700">The anterior tibial artery may, on occasion, be small but it is rarely absent. Its function may be replaced by perforating branches from the posterior tibial artery or by the perforating branch of the fibular artery. It occasionally deviates laterally, regaining its usual position at the ankle. It may also be larger than normal, in which case its territory of supply in the foot may be increased to include the plantar surface.</div><div class="text" id="p2705">The named branches of the anterior tibial artery are the posterior and anterior tibial recurrent, muscular, perforating, and anterior medial and lateral malleolar arteries.</div><section><a id="s2190"/><section><a id="s2195"/><section><a id="s2200"/><section><a id="s2205"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1750">Relations</p><div class="textfl" id="p2710">In its proximal two-thirds the anterior tibial artery lies on the interosseous membrane, and in its distal third it is anterior to the tibia and ankle joint. Proximally, it lies between tibialis anterior and extensor digitorum longus, then between tibialis anterior and extensor hallucis longus. At the ankle it is crossed superficially from the lateral side by the tendon of extensor hallucis longus and then lies between this tendon and the first tendon of extensor digitorum longus. Its proximal two-thirds are covered by adjoining muscles and deep fascia, its distal third by the skin, fasciae and extensor retinacula. It is accompanied by venae comitantes. The deep fibular nerve, curling laterally round the fibular neck, reaches the lateral side of the artery where it enters the extensor region, is then anterior to the artery in the middle third of the leg, and becomes lateral again distally.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s2210"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1755">Posterior tibial recurrent artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2715">The posterior tibial recurrent artery is an inconstant branch that arises before the anterior tibial artery reaches the extensor compartment of the leg. It ascends anterior to popliteus, anastomosing with the inferior genicular branches of the popliteal artery. It supplies the superior tibiofibular joint.</div></section><section><a id="s2215"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1760">Anterior tibial recurrent artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2720">The anterior tibial recurrent artery arises near the posterior tibial recurrent artery. It ascends in tibialis anterior, ramifies on the front and sides of the knee joint, and joins the patellar anastomosis, which interconnects with the genicular branches of the popliteal and circumflex fibular arteries.</div></section><section><a id="s2220"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1765">Muscular branches</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2725">Numerous branches supply the adjacent muscles. Some then pierce the deep fascia to supply the skin, while others traverse the interosseous membrane to anastomose with branches of the posterior tibial and fibular arteries.</div></section><section><a id="s2225"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1770">Perforating branches</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2730">Most of the fasciocutaneous perforators pass along the anterior fibular fascial septum behind extensor digitorum longus before penetrating the deep fascia to supply the skin.</div></section><section><a id="s2230"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1775">Anterior medial malleolar artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2735">The anterior medial malleolar artery arises approximately 5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm proximal to the ankle. It passes posterior to the tendons of extensor hallucis longus and tibialis anterior medial to the joint, where it joins branches of the posterior tibial and medial plantar arteries.</div></section><section><a id="s2235"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1780">Anterior lateral malleolar artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2740">The anterior lateral malleolar artery runs posterior to the tendons of extensor digitorum longus and fibularis tertius to the lateral side of the ankle and anastomoses with the perforating branch of the fibular artery and ascending branches of the lateral tarsal artery.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s2240"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle1785">Posterior tibial artery</h4><div class="textfl" id="p2745">The posterior tibial artery begins at the distal border of popliteus, between the tibia and fibula (see <a href="../B9780702077050000768/B9780702077050000768.xhtml#f0020">Figs 76.4B</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000781/B9780702077050000781.xhtml#f0025">78.4</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000781/B9780702077050000781.xhtml#f0200">78.40</a>). It descends medially in the flexor compartment and divides under abductor hallucis, midway between the medial malleolus and the calcaneal tubercle, into the medial and lateral plantar arteries. In its course, the posterior tibial artery gives off a communicating branch that runs posteriorly across the tibia approximately 5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm above its distal end, deep to flexor hallucis longus, and joins a communicating branch of the fibular artery; calcaneal branches that arise just proximal to the termination of the posterior tibial artery, pierce the flexor retinaculum and supply the skin <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E98" id="pagebreak_1.464E98"/><a id="pg1464.e96"/>and fat behind the calcaneal tendon; and the artery of the tarsal canal. The posterior tibial artery may be much reduced in length or in calibre, in which case, the fibular artery then takes over its distal territory of supply and may consequently be increased in size.</div><div class="text" id="p2750">The named branches of the posterior tibial artery are the circumflex fibular, nutrient, muscular, perforating, communicating, medial malleolar, calcaneal, fibular and medial and lateral plantar arteries.</div><section><a id="s2245"/><section><a id="s2250"/><section><a id="s2255"/><section><a id="s2260"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1790">Relations</p><div class="textfl" id="p2755">The posterior tibial artery is successively posterior to tibialis posterior, flexor digitorum longus, the tibia and the ankle joint. Proximally, gastrocnemius, soleus and the transverse intermuscular septum of the leg are superficial to the artery, and distally, it is covered only by skin and fascia. It is parallel with and approximately 2.5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm anterior to the medial border of the calcaneal tendon; terminally, it is deep to the flexor retinaculum. The artery is accompanied by two veins and the tibial nerve. The nerve is at first medial to the artery but soon crosses behind it and subsequently becomes largely posterolateral in position.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s2265"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1795">Circumflex fibular artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2760">The circumflex fibular artery, which sometimes arises from the anterior tibial artery, passes laterally round the neck of the fibula through the soleus to anastomose with the inferior medial and lateral genicular and anterior tibial recurrent arteries. It supplies bone and related articular structures.</div></section><section><a id="s2270"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1800">Nutrient artery of the tibia</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2765">The nutrient artery of the tibia is one of the largest of the nutrient arteries. It arises from the posterior tibial artery near its origin. After giving off a few muscular branches, it descends into the bone immediately distal to the soleal line.</div></section><section><a id="s2275"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1805">Muscular branches</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2770">Muscular branches are distributed to soleus and the deep flexors of the leg.</div></section><section><a id="s2280"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1810">Perforating branches</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2775">Approximately five fasciocutaneous perforators emerge between flexor digitorum longus and soleus, and pass through the deep fascia, often accompanying the perforating veins that connect the deep and superficial venous systems. The arterial perforators then divide into anterior and posterior branches to supply the regional periosteum and skin. These vessels are utilized in raising medial fasciocutaneous perforator flaps in the leg.</div></section><section><a id="s2285"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1815">Communicating branch</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2780">The communicating branch runs posteriorly across the tibia approximately 5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm above its distal end, deep to flexor hallucis longus, to join a communicating branch of the fibular artery.</div></section><section><a id="s2290"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1820">Medial malleolar branches</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2785">The medial malleolar branches pass round the medial malleolus to the medial malleolar network, which supplies the skin.</div></section><section><a id="s2295"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1825">Calcaneal branches</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2790">Calcaneal branches arise just proximal to the terminal division of the posterior tibial artery. They pierce the flexor retinaculum to supply fat and skin behind the calcaneal tendon and in the heel, and muscles on the tibial side of the sole; the branches anastomose with medial malleolar arteries and calcaneal branches of the fibular artery.</div></section><section><a id="s2300"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1830">Fibular artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2795">The fibular artery arises from the posterior tibial artery approximately 2.5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm distal to popliteus and passes obliquely to the fibula, descending along its medial crest either in a fibrous canal between tibialis posterior and flexor hallucis longus or within flexor hallucis longus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000768/B9780702077050000768.xhtml#f0020">Figs 76.4B</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000781/B9780702077050000781.xhtml#f0025">78.4</a>). Reaching the inferior tibiofibular syndesmosis, it divides into calcaneal branches that ramify on the lateral and posterior surfaces of the calcaneus. Proximally, it is covered by soleus and the transverse intermuscular septum between soleus and the deep muscles of the leg, and distally it is overlapped by flexor hallucis longus.</div><div class="text" id="p2800">The fibular artery may branch high from the posterior tibial artery or may even branch from the popliteal artery separately, resulting in a true ‘trifurcation’. It may also branch more distally from the posterior tibial artery, sometimes 7 or 8<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm distal to popliteus. Its size tends to be inversely related to the size of the other arteries of the leg. It may be reduced in size but is more often enlarged, when it may join, reinforce or even replace the posterior tibial artery in the distal leg and foot.</div><div class="text" id="p2805">The fibular artery has muscular, nutrient, perforating, communicating and calcaneal branches.</div><section><a id="s2305"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1835">Muscular branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p2810">Multiple short branches supply soleus, tibialis posterior, flexor hallucis longus and the fibular muscles.</div></section><section><a id="s2310"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1840">Nutrient artery</p><div class="textfl" id="p2815">The nutrient artery branches from the main trunk approximately 7<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm from its origin and enters the fibula 14–19<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm from the apex of the head of the fibula.</div></section><section><a id="s2315"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1845">Perforating branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p2820">The main perforating branch traverses the interosseous membrane approximately 5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm proximal to the lateral malleolus to enter the extensor compartment, where it anastomoses with the anterior lateral malleolar artery. Descending anterior to the inferior tibiofibular syndesmosis, it supplies the tarsus and anastomoses with the lateral tarsal artery. This branch is sometimes enlarged and may replace the dorsalis pedis artery.</div><div class="text" id="p2825">Fasciocutaneous perforators from the lateral muscular branches pass along the posterior fibular fascial septum to penetrate the deep fascia and reach the skin. These vessels are utilized in raising fasciocutaneous posterolateral leg flaps.</div></section><section><a id="s2320"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1850">Communicating branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p2830">The communicating branch connects to a communicating branch of the posterior tibial artery approximately 5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm proximal to the ankle.</div></section><section><a id="s2325"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1855">Calcaneal branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p2835">Calcaneal (terminal) branches anastomose with the anterior lateral malleolar and calcaneal branches of the posterior tibial artery.</div></section></section><section><a id="s2330"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1860">Medial plantar artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2840">The medial plantar artery is the smaller terminal branch of the posterior tibial artery and passes distally along the medial side of the foot, medial to the medial plantar nerve (see <a href="../B9780702077050000768/B9780702077050000768.xhtml#f0020">Figs 76.4B</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000793/B9780702077050000793.xhtml#f0120">79.26</a>). At first deep to abductor hallucis, it runs distally between this muscle and flexor digitorum brevis, and supplies both. Near the first metatarsal base, its size, already diminished by muscular branches, is further reduced to a superficial stem that divides to form three superficial digital branches. These accompany the digital branches of the medial plantar nerve and join the first to third plantar metatarsal arteries. The main trunk of the medial plantar artery then runs on to reach the medial border of the hallux, where it anastomoses with a branch of the first plantar metatarsal artery.</div></section><section><a id="s2335"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1865">Lateral plantar artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2845">The lateral plantar artery is the larger terminal branch of the posterior tibial artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000793/B9780702077050000793.xhtml#f0120">Fig. 79.26</a>). It passes distally and laterally to the fifth metatarsal base; the lateral plantar nerve is medial. (The medial and lateral plantar nerves lie between the corresponding plantar arteries.) Turning medially with the deep branch of the nerve, the lateral plantar artery reaches the interval between the first and second metatarsal bases, and unites with the dorsalis pedis artery to complete the deep plantar arch. As it passes laterally, it is first between the calcaneus and abductor hallucis, then between flexor digitorum brevis and flexor accessorius. Running distally to the fifth metatarsal base, it passes between flexor digitorum brevis and abductor digiti minimi, and is covered by the plantar aponeurosis, superficial fascia and skin.</div><div class="text" id="p2850">Muscular branches supply the adjoining muscles. Superficial branches emerge along the intermuscular septum to supply the skin and subcutaneous tissue over the lateral part of the sole. Anastomotic branches run to the lateral border and join branches of the lateral tarsal and arcuate arteries. Sometimes, a calcaneal branch pierces abductor hallucis to supply the skin of the heel. Anastomosis between the medial and lateral plantar arteries superficial to the flexor digitorum brevis is sometimes present and is termed the superficial plantar arch.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s2340"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle1870">Dorsalis pedis artery</h4><div class="textfl" id="p2855">The dorsalis pedis artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000793/B9780702077050000793.xhtml#f0010">Figs 79.1</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000793/B9780702077050000793.xhtml#f0115">79.25</a>) is usually the continuation of the anterior tibial artery distal to the ankle. It passes to the proximal end of the first intermetatarsal space, where it turns into the sole between the heads of the first dorsal interosseous to complete the deep plantar arch, and provides the first plantar metatarsal artery.</div><div class="text" id="p2860">The artery may be larger than normal, to compensate for a small lateral plantar artery. It often diverges laterally from its usual route. It may rarely be absent (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib254" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_254">Robertson et al 1990</a>), in which event it is replaced by a large perforating branch of the fibular artery.</div><div class="text" id="p2865">The dorsalis pedis artery gives rise to the tarsal, arcuate and first dorsal metatarsal arteries (see <a href="../B9780702077050000793/B9780702077050000793.xhtml#f0010">Figs 79.1</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000793/B9780702077050000793.xhtml#f0050">79.10</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000793/B9780702077050000793.xhtml#f0115">79.25</a>).<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E99" id="pagebreak_1.464E99"/><a id="pg1464.e97"/></div><section><a id="s2345"/><section><a id="s2350"/><section><a id="s2355"/><section><a id="s2360"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1875">Relations</p><div class="textfl" id="p2870">The dorsalis pedis artery crosses, successively, the talocrural articular capsule, talus, navicular and intermediate cuneiform and their ligaments; superficial to it are the skin, fasciae, inferior extensor retinaculum and, near its termination, extensor hallucis brevis. Medial to it is the tendon of extensor hallucis longus and lateral to it are the medial tendon of extensor digitorum longus and medial terminal branch of the deep fibular nerve. The tendons and navicular tuberosity are useful landmarks in palpation, or the planning of safe anatomical approaches in surgery of the ankle and foot.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s2365"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1880">Tarsal arteries</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2875">There are two tarsal arteries, lateral and medial (see <a href="../B9780702077050000793/B9780702077050000793.xhtml#f0115">Fig. 79.25</a>). They arise as the dorsalis pedis artery crosses the navicular. The lateral tarsal artery runs laterally under extensor digitorum brevis; it supplies this muscle and the tarsal articulations, and anastomoses with branches of the arcuate, anterior lateral malleolar and lateral plantar arteries, and the perforating branch of the fibular artery. Two or three medial tarsal arteries ramify on the medial border of the foot and join the medial malleolar arterial network.</div></section><section><a id="s2370"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1885">Arcuate artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2880">The arcuate artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000793/B9780702077050000793.xhtml#f0115">Fig. 79.25</a>) arises near the medial cuneiform, passes laterally over the metatarsal bases, deep to the tendons of the digital extensors, and anastomoses with the lateral tarsal and plantar arteries. It supplies the second to fourth dorsal metatarsal arteries, running distally superficial to the corresponding dorsal interossei, and divides into two dorsal digital branches for the adjoining toes in the interdigital clefts. Proximally, these branches receive proximal perforating branches from the deep plantar arch. Distally, they are joined by distal perforating branches from the plantar metatarsal arteries. The fourth dorsal metatarsal artery sends a branch to the lateral side of the fifth toe.</div><div class="text" id="p2885">The frequency of the arcuate artery has been reported to range from 10% to 67%, depending on the precise definition of the artery (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib73" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_73">DiLandro et al 2001</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s2375"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1890">First dorsal metatarsal artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2890">The first dorsal metatarsal artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000793/B9780702077050000793.xhtml#f0115">Fig. 79.25</a>) arises just before the dorsalis pedis artery enters the sole. It runs distally on the first dorsal interosseous and divides at the cleft between the first and second toes. One branch passes under the tendon of extensor hallucis longus and supplies the medial side of the great toe; the other bifurcates to supply the adjoining sides of the great and second toes.</div><section><a id="s2380"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle1895">Cutaneous branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p2895">The dorsalis pedis artery and its first dorsal metatarsal branch give rise to small direct cutaneous branches that supply the dorsal foot skin between the extensor retinaculum and the first web space. This vessel provides the basis for a fasciocutaneous flap raised from this region, and which may be used to cover superficial defects elsewhere.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s2385"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle1900">Deep plantar arch</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2900">The deep plantar arch (see <a href="../B9780702077050000793/B9780702077050000793.xhtml#f0120">Fig. 79.26</a>) is deeply situated, extending from the fifth metatarsal base to the proximal end of the first intermetatarsal space. Convex distally, it is plantar to the bases of the second to fourth metatarsals and corresponding interossei, but dorsal to the oblique part of adductor hallucis.</div><div class="text" id="p2905">The deep plantar arch gives rise to three perforating and four plantar metatarsal branches, and numerous branches that supply the skin, fasciae and muscles in the sole. Three perforating branches ascend through the proximal ends of the second to fourth intermetatarsal spaces, between the heads of dorsal interossei, and anastomose with the dorsal metatarsal arteries. Four plantar metatarsal arteries extend distally between the metatarsals in contact with the interossei (see <a href="../B9780702077050000793/B9780702077050000793.xhtml#f0120">Fig. 79.26</a>). Each divides into two plantar digital arteries, supplying the adjacent digital aspects. Near its division, each plantar metatarsal artery sends a distal perforating branch dorsally to join a dorsal metatarsal artery. The first plantar metatarsal artery springs from the junction between the lateral plantar and dorsalis pedis arteries, and sends a digital branch to the medial side of the great toe. The lateral digital branch for the fifth toe arises directly from the lateral plantar artery near the fifth metatarsal base. Haemorrhage from the deep plantar arch is difficult to control because of the depth of the vessel and its important close relations.</div><section><a id="s2390"/><section><a id="s7390"/><section><a id="s2395"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle1905">Surface anatomy</p><div class="textfl" id="p2910">The lateral plantar artery begins between the heel and medial malleolus, and crosses obliquely to a point 2.5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm medial to the tuberosity of the fifth metatarsal. With a slight distal convexity, it reaches the proximal end of the first intermetatarsal space.</div></section></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s2400"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle1910">Arterial perforators of the lower limb and surgical flaps</h4><div class="textfl" id="p2915">Achieving adequate and aesthetically satisfactory skin and soft tissue cover for large, superficial tissue defects is a perennial challenge in the field of plastic and reconstructive surgery, and accounts for a substantial part of a plastic surgeon’s workload. Generally, split-thickness and full-thickness skin grafts are suitable only for very superficial defects. To achieve tissue coverage for deeper and larger tissue defects, one of a variety of autologous tissue flaps may be used. A fasciocutaneous flap is composed of skin, fat and deep fascia (fascia musculorum); a lower-extremity fasciocutaneous flap (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib240" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_240">Pontén 1981</a>) is very useful in the repair of soft tissue defects of the leg.</div><div class="text" id="p2920">The viability of a flap transplanted from one part of the body to another is crucially dependent on the blood supply of the flap. An appreciation of the angiosome concept (<a href="../B9780702077050000069/B9780702077050000069.xhtml">Chs 6, 7</a>), coupled with technological advances in reconstructive microsurgery, has stimulated the development and use of perforator (or perforator-based) flaps. These are flaps of skin or subcutaneous tissue supplied by one or more fascial ‘perforators’, i.e. arteries, which reach the suprafascial plexus either directly from a source vessel, or indirectly from some other neighbouring tissue (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib114" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_114">Harry et al 2009</a>) (see <a href="../B9780702077050000768/B9780702077050000768.xhtml#f0030">Fig. 76.6</a>). Perforator-based flaps are typically harvested with sparing of underlying muscle tissue and minimal trauma; their use is said to reduce postoperative pain, donor site morbidity and functional loss.</div><div class="text" id="p2925">The lower limb is the largest donor site in the body for perforator-based flaps. Commonly used flaps include anterolateral thigh flaps, which provide a large amount of skin; superior and inferior gluteal artery perforator flaps used in breast reconstruction; vascularized fibular flaps for reconstruction of deficient bone; vascularized tensor fasciae latae flaps for tendon reconstruction; vascularized sural nerve flaps for nerve reconstruction; and the gracilis muscle flap, used for example in the reanimation of paralysed muscle.</div><div class="text" id="p2930">In the context of perforator flap surgery, the lower limb may be considered in terms of four anatomic regions: gluteal; anterior hip and thigh; knee and leg; ankle and foot. Each lower limb accounts for approximately 23% of the total body surface area (thigh 10.5%, leg 6.5%, buttock 2.5% and foot 3.5%) and contains an average of 90 arterial perforators.</div><section><a id="s2405"/><section><a id="s2410"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1915">Gluteal region</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2935">The gluteal region of the lower limb has an average of 21 perforators, which arise from three main source arteries: namely, the superior and inferior gluteal and the internal pudendal arteries (see <a href="../B9780702077050000768/B9780702077050000768.xhtml#f0035">Fig. 76.7</a>). The flaps based on these perforators are used as free flaps for breast reconstruction and as local flaps for covering defects in the sacral and perineal region.</div></section><section><a id="s2415"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1920">Hip and thigh region</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2940">The hip and thigh region has six source arteries and an average of 50 arterial perforators. The thigh can be divided into four areas: anteromedial; anterolateral and trochanteric; posteromedial; and posterolateral. The perforators that supply the anteromedial thigh are derived from the femoral artery, and those for the anterolateral thigh are derived from branches of the lateral circumflex femoral artery. Perforators that supply the skin over the posteromedial and posterolateral thigh regions are derived from the profunda femoris artery and the popliteal arteries. Skin flaps based on the superficial circumflex iliac, superficial external pudendal and superficial inferior epigastric arteries have been used as local flaps, tube pedicles and free tissue transfers. Other popular skin flaps are TFL (tensor fasciae latae) perforator flaps, ALT (anterolateral thigh) and AMT (anteromedial thigh) flaps, the gracilis perforator flap and posterior thigh flaps.</div></section><section><a id="s2420"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1925">Knee and leg region</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2945">The perforators, which arise from the rich vascular anastomosis around the patella, generally traverse the tendon of quadriceps femoris to supply the skin over the patella and the peripatellar region (see <a href="../B9780702077050000768/B9780702077050000768.xhtml#f0035">Fig. 76.7</a>). The skin flaps based on these perforators may be used as distally based or proximally based flaps to cover defects over the knee and popliteal region. The direct cutaneous branch of the popliteal artery and a superficial sural artery, which accompanies the sural nerve, provide additional perforators to the skin over the back of the knee. The posterior tibial artery gives off an average of ten perforators to the skin covering the anteromedial and posterior parts of the leg. In the upper third of the leg, the perforating vessels are predominantly muscular and periosteocutaneous, while in the lower third, the perforating vessels are mainly direct subcutaneous types. They anastomose with the perforating branches of the anterior tibial artery anteriorly and fibular artery posteriorly. Inferiorly, the posterior tibial artery forms a rich <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E100" id="pagebreak_1.464E100"/><a id="pg1464.e98"/>anastomotic ring around the ankle joint with the fibular and anterior tibial arteries. Perforators from these vessels supply the calcaneal tendon and the overlying skin. The posterior tibial artery gives off three direct cutaneous perforators in the lower part of the leg; a distally based skin or adipofascial flap based on one of these perforators may be used to reconstruct a defect over the anterior or the posterior aspect of the lower leg. The anterior tibial artery gives off an average of six perforators, which supply the anterolateral part of the leg. They emerge in two longitudinal rows; one perforator is fairly large and accompanies the superficial fibular nerve. A small skin flap based on any one of these perforators may be used to cover small defects over the tibia, and a neurocutaneous flap that includes the superficial fibular nerve may be used.</div><div class="text" id="p2950">The fibular artery has an average of five perforators. A constant perforator pierces the deep fascia approximately 5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm above the lateral malleolus and divides into an ascending and a descending branch. A vascularized fibula graft based on the fibular artery is now the standard graft used in reconstruction of the mandible, while small fasciocutaneous and adipofascial flaps based on the perforators of the fibular artery are useful in covering soft tissue defects over the heel and proximal part of the foot.</div></section><section><a id="s2425"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1930">Ankle and foot region</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2955">The arteries around the ankle and in the foot are the medial and lateral calcaneal arteries, medial and lateral plantar arteries and the dorsalis pedis artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000768/B9780702077050000768.xhtml#f0035">Fig. 76.7</a>). In the foot, the two plantar arteries with communicating arteries from the dorsalis pedis artery give rise to multiple small perforators. In the sole of the foot, the perforators emerge on either side of the plantar aponeurosis, and also pass through it, to supply the skin. ‘Island flaps’ from these perforators may be advanced to reconstruct small defects in the weight-bearing area. The skin of the sole of the foot is highly specialized and therefore, ideally, defects in this region should be reconstructed using local skin.</div></section></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s2430"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle1935">Venous Drainage of the Head and Neck</h2><div class="textfl" id="p2960">The veins of the head and neck can be subdivided into three groups: veins of the exterior of the head and face; veins of the neck; diploic, meningeal, intracranial veins and dural venous sinuses.</div><section><a id="s2435"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle1940">Venous drainage of the face</h3><div class="textfl" id="p2965">The veins of the face are subject to considerable variations; the following description concerns those that are relatively constant (see <a href="../B9780702077050000367/B9780702077050000367.xhtml#f0105">Fig. 36.20</a>).</div><section><a id="s2440"/><section><a id="s2445"/><section><a id="s2450"/><h4 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1945">Ophthalmic veins</h4><div class="textfl" id="p2970">Superior and inferior ophthalmic veins link the facial and intracranial veins. The superior ophthalmic vein forms posteromedial to the upper eyelid from tributaries that connect anteriorly with the facial and supraorbital veins. It runs with the ophthalmic artery, receiving corresponding tributaries and traverses the superior orbital fissure to end in the cavernous sinus. The inferior ophthalmic vein begins in a network near the anterior region of the orbital floor and medial wall, receiving veins from inferior rectus and inferior oblique, the lacrimal sac and eyelids. It runs back above inferior rectus and often joins the superior ophthalmic vein or may reach the cavernous sinus independently. It is connected with the pterygoid plexus via small branches that pass through the inferior orbital fissure.</div></section><section><a id="s2455"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1950">Central retinal vein</h5><div class="textfl" id="p2975">The central retinal vein traverses the optic nerve then leaves it to pursue a long course in the subarachnoid space before entering the cavernous sinus or the superior ophthalmic veins. It receives a central vein from within the optic nerve.</div></section><section><a id="s2460"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1955">Supratrochlear vein</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2980">The supratrochlear vein starts on the forehead from a venous network connected to the frontal tributaries of the superficial temporal vein. Veins from this network form a single trunk that descends to the bridge of the nose, near the midline and parallel with its contralateral fellow. The veins are joined by a nasal arch across the nose and then diverge, each joining a supraorbital vein to form the facial vein near the medial canthus of the eye.</div></section><section><a id="s2465"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1960">Supraorbital vein</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2985">The supraorbital vein begins near the zygomatic process of the frontal bone, connecting with branches of the superficial and middle temporal veins. It passes medially above the orbital opening, pierces orbicularis oculi and unites with the supratrochlear vein near the medial canthus of the eye to form the facial vein. A branch passes through the supraorbital notch, where it receives veins from the frontal sinus and frontal diploë, and subsequently connects with the superior ophthalmic vein.</div></section><section><a id="s2470"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1965">Facial vein</h6><div class="textfl" id="p2990">The facial vein is the main vein draining the face. After receiving the supratrochlear and supraorbital veins, it travels obliquely downwards by the side of the nose, passes under zygomaticus major, risorius and platysma, descends to the anterior border of masseter and then passes over the surface of the muscle. The facial vein initially lies behind the more tortuous facial artery but it crosses the artery at the lower border of the mandible and enters the neck, where it runs obliquely back under platysma. Here it lies superficial to the submandibular gland, digastric and stylohyoid (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0070">Fig. 35.13</a>). Just anteroinferior to the mandibular angle, it is joined by the anterior division of the retromandibular vein, and then descends superficial to the loop of the lingual artery, the hypoglossal nerve and external and internal carotid arteries, to enter the internal jugular vein near the greater cornu of the hyoid bone, i.e. in the upper angle of the carotid triangle. Near its end, a large branch often descends along the anterior border of sternocleidomastoid to join the anterior jugular vein. Its uppermost segment, above its junction with the superior labial vein, is often termed the angular vein.</div><div class="text" id="p2995">Near its origin, the facial vein connects with the superior ophthalmic vein, both directly and via the supraorbital vein, and so is linked to the cavernous sinus. On the face, the facial vein receives tributaries from the side of the nose and, below this, an important deep facial vein from the pterygoid venous plexus. It also receives the inferior palpebral, superior and inferior labial, buccinator, parotid and masseteric veins. The portion of the facial vein that lies below the mandible receives submental, tonsillar, external palatine (paratonsillar) and submandibular veins, vena comitans of the hypoglossal nerve (sometimes), and the pharyngeal and superior thyroid veins.</div></section><section><a id="s2475"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1970">Superficial temporal vein</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3000">A widespread venous network across the scalp receives branches from the supratrochlear, supraorbital, posterior auricular and occipital veins. Anterior and posterior tributaries from this network unite above the zygomatic arch to form the superficial temporal vein on each side. The vein accompanies its artery, usually lying behind it, crosses the posterior root of the zygoma and enters the parotid gland. In its course it receives the parotid veins, rami draining the temporomandibular joint, and the anterior auricular, transverse facial and middle temporal veins. The middle temporal vein receives the orbital vein (formed by the lateral palpebral veins), pierces the temporal fascia and then passes back between the layers of the fascia to join the superficial temporal vein just above the level of the zygomatic arch. The superficial temporal vein joins the maxillary vein in the parotid gland to form the retromandibular vein.</div></section><section><a id="s2480"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1975">Buccal, mental and infraorbital veins</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3005">The buccal, mental and infraorbital veins drain the cheek and chin regions and pass into the pterygoid venous plexus.</div></section><section><a id="s2485"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1980">Pterygoid venous plexus</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3010">The pterygoid plexus is found partly between temporalis and lateral pterygoid and partly between lateral and medial pterygoid. Sphenopalatine, deep temporal, pterygoid, masseteric, buccal, dental, greater palatine and middle meningeal veins and a branch or branches from the inferior ophthalmic vein are all tributaries. The plexus is connected by the deep facial vein with the facial vein and with the cavernous sinus through the sphenoidal emissary foramen, foramen ovale and foramen lacerum. Its deep temporal tributaries are often connected with tributaries of the anterior diploic vein and thus with the middle meningeal veins.</div></section><section><a id="s2490"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1985">Maxillary vein</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3015">The maxillary vein is a short trunk that accompanies the first part of the maxillary artery. It is derived from the confluence of veins from the pterygoid plexus, and passes back between the sphenomandibular ligament and the neck of the mandible, joining the superficial temporal vein to form the retromandibular vein.</div></section><section><a id="s2495"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1990">Retromandibular vein</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3020">The retromandibular vein descends in the parotid gland, between the external carotid artery and, superficially, the facial nerve. It divides into an anterior branch going forwards to join the facial vein and a posterior branch that joins the posterior auricular vein to form the external jugular vein. Occasionally it is not connected to the external jugular vein, which is then small and the anterior jugular is often enlarged.<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E101" id="pagebreak_1.464E101"/><a id="pg1464.e99"/></div></section><section><a id="s2500"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle1995">Posterior auricular vein</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3025">The posterior auricular vein arises in a parieto-occipital network that also drains into tributaries of the occipital and superficial temporal veins. It descends behind the auricle to join the posterior division of the retromandibular vein in, or just below, the parotid gland, to form the external jugular vein. It receives a stylomastoid vein and tributaries from the cranial surface of the auricle, drains the region of the scalp behind the ear and drains into the external jugular vein.</div></section><section><a id="s2505"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2000">Occipital vein</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3030">The occipital vein begins in a posterior network in the scalp, pierces the cranial attachment of trapezius, turns into the suboccipital triangle and joins the deep cervical and vertebral veins. It may be joined by a vein draining the diploë in the occipital bone and then passes to either the internal jugular, posterior auricular, deep cervical or vertebral veins. Emissary veins connect the occipital vein to the intracranial venous sinuses via the mastoid and parietal foramina and through the posterior condylar canal and occipital protuberances.</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s2510"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle2005">Venous drainage of the neck</h3><div class="textfl" id="p3035">Veins in the neck show considerable variation. They are superficial or deep to the deep fascia but are not entirely separate systems. Superficial veins are tributaries – some with specific names, given below – of the anterior, external and posterior jugular veins (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0070">Figs 35.13</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0075">35.14</a>). They drain a much smaller volume of tissue than the deep veins. The latter drain all but the subcutaneous structures, mostly into the internal jugular vein and also into the subclavian vein.</div><section><a id="s2515"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle2010">External jugular vein</h4><div class="textfl" id="p3040">The external jugular vein mainly drains the scalp and face, although it also drains some deeper parts. The vein is formed by the union of the posterior division of the retromandibular vein with the posterior auricular vein and begins near the mandibular angle just below or in the parotid gland (see <a href="../B9780702077050000331/B9780702077050000331.xhtml#f0085">Fig. 33.3A</a>). It descends from the angle to the mid-clavicle, running obliquely, superficial to sternocleidomastoid, to the root of the neck. Here, it crosses the deep fascia and ends in the subclavian vein, lateral or anterior to scalenus anterior. There are valves at its entrance into the subclavian but they do not prevent regurgitation. Its wall is adherent to the rim of the fascial opening. It is covered by platysma, superficial fascia and skin, and is separated from sternocleidomastoid by deep cervical fascia. The vein crosses the transverse cutaneous nerve and lies parallel with the great auricular nerve, posterior to its upper half. In size, the external jugular vein is inversely proportional to the other veins in the neck and may be double. Between the entrance into the subclavian vein and a point approximately 4<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm above the clavicle, the vein is often dilated, producing a so-called sinus. In addition to formative tributaries, the external jugular receives the posterior external jugular and, near its end, transverse cervical, suprascapular and anterior jugular veins. In the parotid gland, it is often joined by a branch from the internal jugular vein. The occipital vein occasionally joins it.</div><section><a id="s2525"/><section><a id="s2530"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2015">Posterior external jugular vein</h5><div class="textfl" id="p3045">The posterior external jugular vein begins in the occipital scalp and drains the skin and the superficial muscles that lie posterosuperior in the neck. It usually joins the middle part of the external jugular vein.</div></section><section><a id="s2535"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2020">Anterior jugular vein</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3050">The anterior jugular vein arises near the hyoid bone from the confluence of the superficial submandibular veins. It descends between the midline and the anterior border of sternocleidomastoid. Turning laterally, low in the neck, deep to sternocleidomastoid but superficial to the infrahyoid strap muscles, it either joins the end of the external jugular vein or may enter the subclavian vein directly (see <a href="../B9780702077050000331/B9780702077050000331.xhtml#f0085">Fig. 33.3A</a>). In size, it is usually inverse to the external jugular vein. It communicates with the internal jugular vein and receives the laryngeal veins and sometimes a small thyroid vein. There are usually two anterior jugular veins, united just above the manubrium by a large transverse jugular arch, receiving the inferior thyroid tributaries. They have no valves and may be replaced by a midline trunk.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s2540"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle2025">Internal jugular vein</h4><div class="textfl" id="p3055">The internal jugular vein collects blood from the skull, brain, superficial parts of the face and much of the neck. It begins at the cranial base in the posterior compartment of the jugular foramen, where it is continuous with the sigmoid sinus. At its origin, it is dilated as the superior bulb, which lies below the posterior part of the tympanic floor. The internal jugular vein descends in the carotid sheath, and unites with the subclavian vein, posterior to the sternal end of the clavicle, to form the brachiocephalic vein (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0075">Fig. 35.14</a>). Near its termination, the vein dilates into the inferior bulb, above which is a pair of valves. The jugular bulb is a dynamic structure; it forms after 2 years of age and its size stabilizes in adulthood (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib93" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_93">Friedmann et al 2011</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p3060">The tributaries are the inferior petrosal sinus, facial, lingual, pharyngeal, superior and middle thyroid veins, and occasionally the occipital vein. The internal jugular vein may communicate with the external jugular vein. The thoracic duct opens near the union of the left subclavian and internal jugular veins, and the right lymphatic duct opens at the same site on the right.</div><section><a id="s2545"/><section><a id="s2550"/><section><a id="s2555"/><section><a id="s2560"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle2030">Relations</p><div class="textfl" id="p3065">From above, rectus capitis lateralis, the transverse process of the atlas, levator scapulae, scalenus medius, scalenus anterior, the cervical plexus, the phrenic nerve, thyrocervical trunk, vertebral vein and the first part of the subclavian artery all lie posterior to the vein. On the left, the internal jugular crosses anterior to the thoracic duct. The internal and common carotid arteries and the vagus nerve are medial to the vein, the vagus lying between and posterior to the vessels. The accessory nerve is sometimes found posterior to the vein. Superficially, the internal jugular vein is overlapped above, then covered below, by sternocleidomastoid, and is crossed by the posterior belly of digastric and the superior belly of omohyoid. The parotid gland, styloid process, accessory nerve (almost always), and the posterior auricular and occipital arteries cross the vein superior to the posterior belly of digastric. Between digastric and omohyoid, the sternocleidomastoid arteries and the inferior root of the ansa cervicalis cross the internal jugular vein, the nerve often passing between the vein and the common carotid artery. Below omohyoid, the vein is covered by the infrahyoid muscles and sternocleidomastoid and is crossed by the anterior jugular vein. Deep cervical lymph nodes lie along the internal jugular, mainly on its superficial aspect. At the root of the neck, the right internal jugular vein is separated from the common carotid artery, but the left usually overlaps its artery. At the base of the skull, the internal carotid artery is anterior to the vein, separated from it by the ninth to twelfth cranial nerves.</div></section><section><a id="s2565"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle2035">Tympanic body</p><div class="textfl" id="p3070">The tympanic body (glomus jugulare) is ovoid, 0.5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm long and 0.25<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm broad, and lies in the adventitia of the upper part of the superior bulb of the internal jugular vein. It is similar in structure to the carotid body and is presumed to have a similar function. The predominant cell type has morphological similarities to adrenal chromaffin cells, being derived from the neural crest. Cells obtained from glomus jugulare paragangliomas show spontaneous neurite outgrowth in culture and have vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP)-like activity. The tympanic body may be present as two or more parts near the tympanic branch of the glossopharyngeal nerve or the auricular branch of the vagus as they lie within their canals in the petrous part of the temporal bone. Tumours of tympanic bodies often involve the adjacent cranial nerves and present with pulsatile tinnitus and a husky voice. These tumours grow into the hypotympanum of the middle ear; intraluminal growth, both proximally and distally, is well recognized.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s2570"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2040">Inferior petrosal sinus</h5><div class="textfl" id="p3075">The inferior petrosal sinus leaves the skull through the anterior part of the jugular foramen, crosses lateral or medial to the ninth to eleventh cranial nerves, and joins the superior jugular bulb.</div></section><section><a id="s2575"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2045">Lingual veins</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3080">The lingual veins follow two routes. The dorsal lingual vein drains the dorsum and side of the tongue, joins the lingual vein accompanying the lingual artery between hyoglossus and genioglossus, and enters the internal jugular vein near the greater cornu of the hyoid bone. The deep lingual vein begins near the tip of the tongue and runs back, lying near the mucous membrane on the inferior surface of the tongue. Near the anterior border of hyoglossus, it joins a sublingual vein from the sublingual salivary gland to form the vena comitans nervi hypoglossi, which runs back between mylohyoid and hyoglossus with the hypoglossal nerve to join either the facial, internal jugular or lingual vein (see <a href="../B9780702077050000331/B9780702077050000331.xhtml#f0085">Fig. 33.3A</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s2580"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2050">Pharyngeal veins</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3085">The pharyngeal veins begin in a pharyngeal plexus external to the pharynx. They receive meningeal veins and a vein from the pterygoid canal, and usually end in the internal jugular vein, but may sometimes end in the facial, lingual or superior thyroid vein.</div></section><section><a id="s2585"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2055">Superior thyroid vein</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3090">The superior thyroid vein is formed by deep and superficial tributaries corresponding to the arterial branches in the upper part of the thyroid <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E102" id="pagebreak_1.464E102"/><a id="pg1464.e100"/>gland (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0070">Figs 35.13</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0075">35.14</a>). It accompanies the superior thyroid artery, receives the superior laryngeal and cricothyroid veins, and ends in the internal jugular or facial vein.</div></section><section><a id="s2590"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2060">Middle thyroid vein</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3095">The middle thyroid vein drains the lower part of the thyroid gland and receives veins from the larynx and trachea. It crosses anterior to the common carotid artery to join the internal jugular vein behind the superior belly of omohyoid. The middle thyroid vein is encountered early in thyroid, parathyroid and pharyngeal pouch surgery and usually ligated. It is one of only two structures that lie within the paracarotid tunnel, the other being a non-recurrent laryngeal nerve.</div></section><section><a id="s2595"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2065">Vertebral vein</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3100">Numerous small tributaries from internal vertebral plexuses leave the vertebral canal above the posterior arch of the atlas and join small veins from local deep muscles in the suboccipital triangle. Their union produces a vessel that enters the foramen in the transverse process of the atlas, forms a plexus around the vertebral artery, and descends through successive transverse foramina to end as the vertebral vein. The vein emerges from the sixth cervical transverse foramen, and descends, at first anterior, then anterolateral, to the vertebral artery. It may join the deep cervical vein before it opens superoposteriorly into the brachiocephalic vein (see <a href="../B9780702077050000331/B9780702077050000331.xhtml#f0035">Fig. 33.4</a>); the opening has a paired valve. As it descends, it passes behind the internal jugular vein and anterior to the first part of the subclavian artery. A small accessory vertebral vein usually descends from the vertebral plexus, traverses the seventh cervical transverse foramen and turns forwards between the subclavian artery and the cervical pleura to join the brachiocephalic vein. The vertebral artery or vein can be encountered deep in Chassaignac’s triangle and care should be taken when dissecting this area.</div><div class="text" id="p3105">The vertebral vein is connected with the sigmoid sinus by a vessel in the posterior condylar canal, when the latter exists. It also receives branches from the occipital vein, the veins draining the prevertebral muscles, and the internal and external vertebral plexuses. It is joined by the anterior vertebral and deep cervical veins and sometimes, near its end, by the first intercostal vein.</div><section><a id="s2600"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle2070">Anterior vertebral vein</p><div class="textfl" id="p3110">The anterior vertebral vein starts in a plexus around the upper cervical transverse processes, descends near the ascending cervical artery between the attachments of scalenus anterior and longus capitis, and opens into the end of the vertebral vein.</div></section><section><a id="s2605"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle2075">Deep cervical vein</p><div class="textfl" id="p3115">The deep cervical vein accompanies its artery between semispinales capitis and cervicis. It is formed in the suboccipital region by the union of communicating branches of the occipital vein, the veins draining the suboccipital muscles, and veins from plexuses around the cervical spines. It passes forwards between the transverse process of the seventh cervical vertebra and the neck of the first rib to end in the inferior part of the vertebral vein.</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s2610"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle2080">Subclavian vein</h4><div class="textfl" id="p3120">The subclavian vein is the central continuation of the axillary vein (see <a href="../B9780702077050000483/B9780702077050000483.xhtml#f0035">Fig. 48.4</a>). It starts at the outer border of the first rib, which it crosses. Initially deep to the clavicular head of pectoralis major and then to subclavius, which is a buffer between it and the overlying medial portion of the clavicle, the vein then runs deep to the insertion of sternocleidomastoid. Only the superior margins of the vein may rise above the medial end of the clavicle, or the entire vein may do so. The phrenic nerve and the inferior part of scalenus anterior lie posteriorly. The subclavian vein joins the internal jugular vein to form the brachiocephalic vein at the medial border of scalenus anterior, behind the sternoclavicular joint (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0075">Fig. 35.14</a>). A pair of valves usually lies within 2<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm of this junction. The subclavian vein receives, as tributaries, the external jugular, dorsal scapular and, sometimes, the anterior jugular veins. The trifurcation of subclavian, external and internal jugular veins is demonstrable by a forced expiration (Valsalva) manoeuvre, when the distended veins rise up above the sternoclavicular joint, filling the fossa above the jugular notch of the sternum. Main lymphatic vessels join the subclavian veins at, or very close to, this junction with the internal jugular vein. The left subclavian vein receives the thoracic duct; the right receives the right lymphatic duct (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0085">Fig. 35.16</a>). There is a risk of air embolism after wounding of the subclavian, external or internal jugular veins.</div></section></section><section><a id="s2615"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle2085">Dural venous sinuses, emissary veins and diploic veins</h3><div class="textfl" id="p3125">Dural venous sinuses form a complex network of venous channels that drain blood from the brain and cranial bones (see <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0010">Figs 25.2</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0125">25.4</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0050">26.10</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0055">26.11</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0065">26.13</a>). They lie between the endosteal and meningeal layers of dura mater, are lined by endothelium, lack valves and their walls are devoid of muscular tissue (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib143" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_143">Kılıç and Akakın 2008</a>). They develop initially as venous plexuses and, to a variable degree, most adult sinuses retain that form. Plexiform arrays of small veins adjoin the superior and inferior sagittal and straight sinuses, and, less frequently, the transverse sinuses. Ridges of ‘spongy’ venous tissue, venous lacunae, often project into the lumina of the superior sagittal and transverse sinuses (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib42" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_42">Browder and Kaplan 1976</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib135" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_135">Kaplan and Browder 1976</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p3130">The plexiform nature of the cranial venous sinuses and their wide connections with cerebral and cerebellar veins vary considerably, particularly in earlier years, e.g. in infancy, the falx cerebelli may contain large plexiform channels and venous lacunae that augment the occipital sinus. These variations must be established for each patient by catheter-based angiography, magnetic resonance (MR) venography or computed tomographic (CT) venography, when clinical necessity arises. The existence of arteriovenous shunts has been inferred from the demonstration of a connection between the middle meningeal arteries and the superior sagittal sinus (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib42" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Browder and Kaplan 1976</a>). Dural arteriovenous fistulae are thought to be acquired lesions that form in an area of thrombosis within a sinus. If the sinus remains completely thrombosed, venous drainage from these lesions takes place through cortical veins: when the sinus remains closed, the elevated pressure within the cortical veins receiving the arterial flow carries the risk of haemorrhage. If the sinus is partially open, venous drainage is usually into the involved sinus.</div><div class="text" id="p3135">The named sinuses are the superior and inferior sagittal, straight, transverse, sigmoid, occipital, cavernous, intercavernous, superior and inferior petrosal, sphenoparietal, basilar and marginal.</div><section><a id="s2620"/><section><a id="s2625"/><section><a id="s2630"/><h4 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2090">Superior sagittal sinus</h4><div class="textfl" id="p3140">The superior sagittal sinus runs in the attached convex margin of the falx cerebri. It grooves the internal surface of the frontal bone, the adjacent margins of the two parietal bones and the squamous part of the occipital bone (see <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0010">Figs 25.2</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0020">25.5</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0050">26.10</a>). It begins near the crista galli, a few millimetres posterior to the foramen caecum, and receives primary tributaries from the cortical veins draining the superior part of the frontal, parietal and occipital lobes, and the anterior part of the orbital surface of the frontal lobe. The sinus is triangular in cross-section, with the apex directed downwards, and is continuous with the falx cerebri. Its lumen is invaded in its intermediate third by projections from its dural walls that may divide the lumen into superior and inferior channels. It is narrow anteriorly, and widens gradually to approximately 1<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm in diameter as it runs posteriorly to enter the confluence of the sinuses, situated to one side (usually the right) of the internal occipital protuberance (see <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0125">Fig. 25.4</a>). (The confluence of the sinuses is also known as the torcular Herophili or the torcula, although the term actually describes the bony gutter in which the confluence lies.) At the confluence of the sinuses, the superior sagittal sinus usually deviates to become continuous with the right transverse sinus, but also usually connects with the occipital and contralateral transverse sinuses. The size and degree of communication of the channels meeting at the confluence are highly variable; any sinus involved may be duplicated, narrowed or widened near the confluence.</div><div class="text" id="p3145">There are usually two or three lateral venous lacunae on each side of the midline, named frontal (small), parietal (large) and occipital (intermediate) lacunae; they tend to become confluent in the elderly, producing a single elongated lacuna on each side. Fine fibrous bands cross the lacunae, and numerous arachnoid granulations project into them (see <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0025">Fig. 25.6</a>). The lacunae mainly drain diploic and meningeal veins. The cortical veins typically pass beneath the lacunae on their way to the sinus. The superior anastomotic vein (of Trolard), the largest cortical vein that connects the superficial Sylvian (middle cerebral) vein and the superior sagittal sinus, often runs in the precentral, central or postcentral sulci. Near its posterior end, the superior sagittal sinus receives veins from the pericranium that pass through parietal foramina. Acute and complete thrombosis of the superior sagittal sinus is an extremely severe condition causing acute elevation of the intracranial pressure and herniation. Slow and progressive occlusion of the sinus, as is typical for sagittal meningiomas, may be compensated by the development of collateral venous drainage with no clinical consequences.</div></section><section><a id="s2635"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2095">Inferior sagittal sinus</h5><div class="textfl" id="p3150">The inferior sagittal sinus is located in the posterior half or two-thirds of the free margin of the falx cerebri (see <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0010">Fig. 25.2</a>). It increases in size posteriorly, ends in the straight sinus, and receives veins from the falx <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E103" id="pagebreak_1.464E103"/><a id="pg1464.e101"/>and sometimes from the medial surfaces of the cerebral hemispheres (anterior pericallosal veins).</div></section><section><a id="s2640"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2100">Straight sinus</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3155">The straight sinus lies in the junction of the falx cerebri and the tentorium cerebelli (see <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0010">Figs 25.2</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0050">26.10</a>). It runs posteroinferiorly as a continuation of the inferior sagittal sinus and drains into the transverse sinus, most commonly into the left sinus. It is not (or is only tenuously) continuous with the superior sagittal sinus. Its tributaries include the great cerebral vein (of Galen), formed by the convergence of the internal cerebral and basal veins, and some superior cerebellar veins which may drain initially into the medial tentorial sinus (a short sinus within the tentorium).</div></section><section><a id="s2645"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2105">Transverse sinus</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3160">The transverse sinuses are attached to the internal occipital protuberance (see <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0010">Figs 25.2</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0125">25.4</a>). They begin at the confluence of the sinuses: one, usually the right, is directly continuous with the superior sagittal sinus, and the other is directly continuous with the straight sinus. The right transverse sinus is typically larger and drains blood from the superficial parts of the brain. The left transverse sinus mainly drains blood from the deep parts of the brain. On each side, the sinuses run in the attached margin of the tentorium cerebelli, first on the squama of the occipital bone, then on the mastoid angle of the parietal bone. Each follows a gentle anterolateral curve, increasing in size as it does so, to the posterolateral part of the petrous temporal bone, where it turns down as a sigmoid sinus that ultimately becomes continuous with the internal jugular vein. The transverse sinuses receive tributaries from the lateral temporal surface and basal surface of the temporal and occipital lobes. The inferior anastomotic vein (of Labbé) is the largest vein that connects the veins of the Sylvian fissure with the transverse sinus. All tributaries of each transverse sinus may drain first into a lateral tentorial sinus. The superior petrosal sinuses drain into the transition between the transverse and sigmoid sinuses on each side (see <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0010">Figs 25.2</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0125">25.4</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s2650"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2110">Sigmoid sinus</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3165">The sigmoid sinuses are continuations of the transverse sinuses, beginning where these leave the tentorium cerebelli (see <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0125">Figs 25.4</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0030">25.7</a>). Each sigmoid sinus curves inferomedially in a groove on the mastoid process of the temporal bone, crosses the jugular process of the occipital bone and turns forwards to the superior jugular bulb, lying posteriorly in the jugular foramen. Anteriorly, a thin plate of bone separates its upper part from the mastoid antrum and mastoid air cells. The sigmoid sinus is connected with pericranial veins via mastoid and condylar emissary veins. Neurosurgical approaches to the lateral aspect of the posterior fossa (cerebellopontine angle) are classified as retrosigmoid, when the craniectomy is located just behind the sigmoid sinus, and presigmoid, when the mastoid bone in front of the sinus is drilled away to provide a more anterior corridor into the posterior fossa.</div></section><section><a id="s2655"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2115">Superior petrosal sinus</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3170">The superior petrosal sinuses are small, narrow sinuses that drain the cavernous sinus into the transverse sinus on each side (see <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0010">Figs 25.2</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0125">25.4</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0035">25.8</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0040">25.9</a>). Each leaves the posterosuperior part of the cavernous sinus and runs posterolaterally in the attached margin of the tentorium cerebelli, crosses superior to the trigeminal nerve to lie in a groove on the superior border of the petrous part of the temporal bone, and ends by joining the transverse sinus at the point where this curves down to become the sigmoid sinus. The superior petrosal sinuses may receive cerebellar and brainstem veins, such as the superior petrosal vein, and, rarely, the inferior cerebral and tympanic veins; they are connected with the inferior petrosal sinuses and the basilar plexus.</div></section><section><a id="s2660"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2120">Inferior petrosal sinus</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3175">The inferior petrosal sinuses drain the cavernous sinus into the internal jugular veins (see <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0125">Figs 25.4</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0050">26.10</a>). They begin at the posteroinferior aspect of the cavernous sinus and run back in the petroclival fissure (a groove between the petrous part of the temporal bone and the basilar part of the occipital bone). On each side, the inferior petrosal sinus then passes through the anteromedial part of the jugular foramen, accompanied by a meningeal branch of the ascending pharyngeal artery, and descends obliquely backwards to drain into the superior jugular bulb. It sometimes drains via a vein in the hypoglossal canal to the suboccipital vertebral plexus.</div><div class="text" id="p3180">The inferior petrosal sinuses are often plexiform. Each receives labyrinthine veins via the cochlear canaliculus and the vestibular aqueduct, and tributaries from the medulla oblongata, pons and inferior cerebellar surface. The venous spaces in the sphenopetroclival area, which are filled anteriorly by blood from the cavernous sinus, medially by blood from the basilar plexus, and laterally by blood from the superior petrosal sinus, typically drain into the inferior petrosal sinuses (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib126" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_126">Iaconetta et al 2003</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s2665"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2125">Cavernous sinus</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3185">The cavernous sinuses are two large venous plexuses that lie on either side of the body of the sphenoid bone (see <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0125">Fig. 25.4</a>). They extend from the superior orbital fissure to the apex of the petrous temporal bone, with an average length of 2<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm and width of 1<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm. The cavity of the cavernous sinus is formed when the two layers of dura that cover the anterior aspect of the pituitary gland separate from each other at the lateral margin of the sella: the outer (endosteal) layer continues laterally to form the anterior (sphenoidal) wall of the cavernous sinus, and the inner (meningeal) layer remains attached to the pituitary gland and runs back towards the dorsum sellae to form the medial (sellar) wall of the cavernous sinus. The posterior dural wall is posterior to the dorsum sellae and upper clivus, and is shared with the basilar plexus. The lateral wall extends from the superior orbital fissure to the petrous apex, and separates the cavernous sinus from Meckel’s cave, which is inferior and posterior to the sinus. The roof of the cavernous sinus is formed by the clinoidal triangle (the dura lining the lower margin of the anterior clinoid process anteriorly), and the oculomotor triangle (the patch of dura between the anterior and posterior clinoids and the petrous apex).</div><div class="text" id="p3190">Each sinus contains the cavernous segment of the internal carotid artery which is associated with a perivascular sympathetic plexus. From proximal to distal, the cavernous carotid artery has several portions, named short ascending, posterior genu, horizontal, anterior genu. The anterior genu of the cavernous carotid artery continues as the paraclinoidal segment of the carotid artery, which typically protrudes into the cavity of the sphenoidal sinus. The cavernous carotid gives off two major arterial branches: the meningohypophysial and inferolateral trunks (see <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0040">Fig. 25.9B</a>). The meningohypophysial trunk typically arises from the posterior genu and gives off the inferior hypophysial, tentorial and dorsal meningeal arteries. The inferolateral trunk arises a few millimetres distal to the meningohypophysial and is distributed around the nerves on the lateral wall of the sinus. (For more detailed descriptions of these branches, including their main variations, see <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib153" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_153">Krisht et al (1994)</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib250" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_250">Reisch et al (1996)</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib299" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_299">Tekdemir et al (1998)</a>.)</div><div class="text" id="p3195">Several cranial nerves run forwards through the cavernous sinus to enter the orbit via the superior orbital fissure (see <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0040">Fig. 25.9</a>). The oculomotor and trochlear nerves and the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve all lie in the lateral wall of the sinus. The abducens nerve enters the cavernous sinus by passing inferior to the petrosphenoidal ligament within a dural tunnel (Dorello’s canal) just posterior to the short ascending portion of the cavernous carotid artery, and then runs on the inferolateral side of the horizontal portion of the cavernous carotid artery, just medial to the ophthalmic nerve. The space between the trochlear and ophthalmic nerves at the lateral wall of the sinus, known as the infratrochlear or Parkinson’s triangle, gives access to the horizontal and posterior genu portions of the cavernous carotid and the meningohypophysial trunk, and the abducens nerve. Unlike the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve, the maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve does not run through the cavernous sinus or its lateral wall, but courses beneath the dura of the middle cranial fossa below the level of the cavernous sinus (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib1" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_1">Abhinav et al 2017</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p3200">Several major venous spaces or compartments can be identified within the sinus in relation to the cavernous carotid artery: superior, posterior, inferior and lateral (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib89" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_89">Fernandez-Miranda et al 2017</a>, modified from <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib112" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_112">Harris and Rhoton 1976</a>). The superior and inferior ophthalmic veins drain into the inferior space; the basilar plexus and inferior petrosal sinus drain into the posterior space; the superior petrosal sinus opens into the superior space; and the superficial middle cerebral vein, the inferior cerebral veins and the sphenoparietal sinus may drain into the lateral compartment. Veins traversing the emissary sphenoidal foramen, foramen ovale and foramen lacerum and, less frequently, the central retinal vein and frontal tributary of the middle meningeal vein, also drain into the cavernous sinus.</div><div class="text" id="p3205">Tumours (meningiomas, haemangiomas, schwannomas) can arise within the cavernous sinus or extend into the cavernous sinus from adjacent regions, typically, these are pituitary adenomas that invade the medial wall of the sinus. Transcranial microsurgical approaches enter the cavernous sinus through the lateral wall (infratrochlear triangle) or roof (oculomotor triangle) of the sinus. Recently introduced endoscopic endonasal approaches facilitate access to the cavernous sinus from its anterior (sphenoidal) and medial (sellar) walls and provide access to the posterior clinoids (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib88" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_88">Fernandez-Miranda et al 2014</a>). (For more detailed descriptions of the microsurgical anatomy of the <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E104" id="pagebreak_1.464E104"/><a id="pg1464.e102"/>cavernous sinus, see <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib77" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_77">Dolenc (1987)</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib314" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_314">Umansky et al (1994)</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib271" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_271">Seoane et al (1998)</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib331" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_331">Yasuda et al (2004)</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib78" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_78">Dolenc and Rogers (2009)</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib88" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Fernandez-Miranda et al (2014</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib89" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">2017)</a>.)</div><section><a id="s2670"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle2130">Caroticocavernous sinus fistula and cavernous sinus thrombosis</p><div class="textfl" id="p3210">Direct communication between the intracavernous portion of the internal carotid artery and the cavernous sinus, creating a caroticocavernous sinus fistula (CCF), may occur as a result of either severe head trauma or aneurysmal vessel disease. The classic signs are ptosis, proptosis (which may be pulsatile), chemosis, periorbital oedema, and extraocular dysmotility causing diplopia secondary to a combination of third, fourth and sixth cranial nerve palsies. Hypo- or hyperaesthesia in the distribution of the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve and a decreased corneal reflex may also be detected. There may be evidence of dilated, tortuous retinal veins and papilloedema. These changes can cause permanent blindness. CCFs are most commonly treated by passing a catheter up the carotid into the fistula, and then occluding it with dilatable balloons or flexible metal coils. Any spreading infection involving the upper nasal cavities, paranasal sinuses, cheek (especially near the medial canthus), upper lip, anterior nares, or even an upper incisor or canine tooth, may very rarely lead to septic thrombosis of the cavernous sinuses; infected thrombi pass from the facial vein or pterygoid venous complex into the sinus via either ophthalmic veins or emissary veins that enter the cranial cavity through the foramen ovale. This is a critical medical emergency with a high risk of disseminated cerebritis and cerebral venous thrombosis.</div></section><section><a id="s2675"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle2135">Intercavernous sinuses</p><div class="textfl" id="p3215">The two cavernous sinuses are connected by superior, inferior and posterior intercavernous sinuses, and the basilar plexus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0125">Figs 25.4</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0035">25.8</a>). The superior and posterior intercavernous sinuses lie in the anterior and posterior attached borders of the diaphragma sellae and they thus form a complete circular venous sinus. The inferior intercavernous sinuses are irregular and plexiform in nature, and commonly encountered in a surgical transnasal approach to the pituitary gland. Obliteration of any intercavernous sinus has no clinical consequences because all connections are valveless and the direction of flow in them is reversible.</div></section></section><section><a id="s2680"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2140">Basilar venous plexus</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3220">The basilar sinus and plexus consist of interconnecting channels between the two layers of dura mater on the clivus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0125">Fig. 25.4</a>). The basilar venous plexus interconnects the cavernous sinuses and inferior and superior petrosal sinuses, and joins the internal vertebral venous plexus.</div></section><section><a id="s2685"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2145">Sphenoparietal sinus</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3225">The sphenoparietal sinuses are inconstant dural venous channels that lie under the lesser wings of the sphenoid bone, near their posterior edge (see <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0125">Fig. 25.4</a>). Each sinus curves medially to open into the anterior part of the cavernous sinus, and receives small veins from the adjacent dura mater and sometimes from the frontal ramus of the middle meningeal vein. In its middle course, each may also receive connecting rami from the superficial middle cerebral vein, temporal lobe veins and the anterior temporal diploic vein. When these connections are well developed, the sphenoparietal sinus is a large channel. It has been suggested that the term sphenoparietal sinus should be abandoned on the basis that it is not an anatomical entity, but an artificial combination of two independent meningeal vessels, namely the parietal portion of the anterior branch of the middle meningeal veins and the sinus of the lesser wing of the sphenoid (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib262" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_262">Ruíz et al 2004</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s2690"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2150">Occipital sinus</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3230">The occipital sinus is the smallest of the sinuses and is typically larger in children. It lies in the attached margin of the falx cerebelli (see <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0125">Fig. 25.4</a>) and is occasionally paired. It starts near the foramen magnum in several small channels, one of which joins the end of the sigmoid sinus and connects with the internal vertebral plexuses. It ends in the confluence of the sinuses.</div></section><section><a id="s2695"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2155">Marginal sinus</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3235">The marginal sinus encircles the foramen magnum. It communicates anteriorly with the basilar plexus and posteriorly with the occipital sinus. It typically drains to the sigmoid sinus or jugular bulb by small sinuses and may connect extracranially to the internal vertebral venous plexus or the paravertebral or deep cervical veins in the suboccipital region.</div></section></section><section><a id="s2700"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle2160">Emissary veins</h5><div class="textfl" id="p3240">Emissary veins traverse cranial apertures and connect intracranial venous sinuses and extracranial veins. Some are relatively constant, others may be absent. These connections are of clinical significance in determining the spread of infection from extracranial foci to venous sinuses, e.g. the spread of infection from the mastoid to the venous sinuses or from the paranasal sinuses to the cavernous sinus, and they may provide alternative drainage pathways in cases of venous sinus thrombosis.</div><div class="text" id="p3245">The following emissary veins have been recognized. A mastoid emissary vein in the mastoid foramen connects the sigmoid sinus with the posterior auricular or occipital veins. A parietal emissary vein in the parietal foramen connects the superior sagittal sinus with the veins of the scalp. The venous plexus of the hypoglossal canal (occasionally a single vein) connects the sigmoid sinus and the internal jugular vein. A supracondylar emissary vein connects the sigmoid sinus and veins in the suboccipital triangle via the posterior condylar canal. A plexus of emissary veins (venous plexus of the foramen ovale) connects the cavernous sinus to the pterygoid plexus via the foramen ovale. Two or three small veins traverse the foramen lacerum and connect the cavernous sinus and the pharyngeal veins and pterygoid plexus. A vein in the emissary sphenoidal foramen (of Vesalius) connects the cavernous sinus with the pharyngeal veins and pterygoid plexus. The internal carotid venous plexus, which passes through the carotid canal, connects the cavernous sinus and the internal jugular vein. A vein may traverse the foramen caecum and connect nasal veins with the superior sagittal sinus. An occipital emissary vein usually connects the confluence of the sinuses with the occipital vein through the occipital protuberance, and also receives the occipital diploic vein. The occipital sinus connects with variably developed veins around the foramen magnum (marginal sinuses) and thus with the vertebral venous plexuses; this pathway provides an alternative venous drainage when the jugular vein is blocked or tied. The ophthalmic veins are potentially emissary because they connect intracranial and extracranial veins. The petrosquamous sinus arises from the dorsolateral portion of the transverse sinus before its confluence with the superior petrosal sinus, courses over the lateral superior surface of the petrous part of the temporal bone, and drains anteroinferiorly into the retromandibular vein and anteromedially into the pterygoid venous plexus. It usually disappears during the development of adult venous patterns in the last three months of prenatal life.</div></section><section><a id="s2705"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle2165">Meningeal veins</h5><div class="textfl" id="p3250">Meningeal veins include the middle meningeal and diploic veins. They begin from plexiform vessels in the dura mater and drain into efferent vessels in the outer dural layer that connect with lacunae associated with some of the cranial sinuses. Intracranial veins also communicate with extracranial veins via emissary veins.</div><section><a id="s2710"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2170">Middle meningeal vein</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3255">The frontal (anterior) branch of the middle meningeal vein crosses the floor of the middle cranial fossa, from either the foramen ovale or foramen spinosum, to the pterion, usually in the form of two parallel channels that accompany the middle meningeal artery. The vein subsequently passes cranially along the anterior margin of the parietal squama to empty into the venous lakes of the superior sagittal sinus. As they course under the most lateral aspect of the lesser sphenoidal wing, the anterior branches of the middle meningeal vessels are contained for a short distance within a bony canal, the sphenoparietal canal (of Trolard), which they leave to enter a groove on the internal surface of the parietal squama. The veins lie closer to the bone than the artery, sometimes occupying separate grooves, and are particularly liable to tear in cranial fractures. Before it enters the sphenoparietal canal, the anterior branch of the middle meningeal vein usually connects with the sinus of the lesser sphenoidal wing, which is connected medially with the anterior and superior aspect of the cavernous sinus by a channel that crosses over the superior ophthalmic vein to reach the sinus. The parietal (posterior) trunk of the middle meningeal vein may traverse the foramen spinosum to end in the pterygoid venous plexus. The frontal trunk may also reach this plexus via the foramen ovale, or it may end in the sphenoparietal or cavernous sinus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0125">Fig. 25.4</a>). The middle meningeal vein receives meningeal tributaries and small inferior cerebral veins, and connects with the diploic and superficial middle cerebral veins. It frequently bears arachnoid granulations.</div></section><section><a id="s2715"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2175">Diploic veins</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3260">The diploic veins are large, thin-walled vessels that occupy channels in the diploë of the cranial bones (see <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0045">Fig. 25.10B</a>). Four main trunks are usually described: the frontal, anterior and posterior temporal, and occipital diploic veins. The frontal vein opens into the supraorbital vein and the superior sagittal sinus; the anterior temporal vein is confined mainly to the frontal bone, and opens into the sphenoparietal sinus and one of the deep temporal veins through an aperture in the greater <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E105" id="pagebreak_1.464E105"/><a id="pg1464.e103"/>wing of the sphenoid; the posterior temporal vein lies in the parietal bone and empties into the transverse sinus either through an opening at the mastoid angle of the parietal bone or through the mastoid foramen; the occipital vein, the largest of the four, is confined to the occipital bone and may open externally into the occipital vein or internally into either the transverse sinus or the confluence of the sinuses.</div></section></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s2720"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle2180">Venous Drainage of the Brain and Spinal Cord</h2><section><a id="s8725"/><section><a id="s2725"/><section><a id="s2730"/><h3 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle2185">Cerebral hemispheres</h3><div class="textfl" id="p3265">Superficial and deep cerebral veins drain the surfaces and the interior of the cerebral hemisphere, respectively. The superficial veins may be divided into three groups, namely superior, middle and inferior. Eight to 12 superior cerebral veins drain the superolateral and medial surfaces of each hemisphere. They mainly follow the sulci, although some pass across gyri. They ascend to the superomedial border of the hemisphere, where they receive small veins from the medial surface, and then open into the superior sagittal sinus. Superior cerebral veins in the anterior part of the hemisphere join the sinus almost at right angles. The larger posterior veins are directed obliquely forwards, against the direction of flow in the sinus, an arrangement which may resist their collapse when intracranial pressure is raised.</div><section><a id="s2735"/><h4 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2190">Middle cerebral veins</h4><div class="textfl" id="p3270">The superficial middle cerebral vein drains most of the lateral surface of the hemisphere, and follows the lateral fissure to end in the cavernous sinus. A superior anastomotic vein runs posterosuperiorly between the superficial middle cerebral vein and the superior sagittal sinus, thus connecting the superior sagittal and cavernous sinuses. An inferior anastomotic vein courses over the temporal lobe and connects the superficial middle cerebral vein to the transverse sinus. The deep middle cerebral vein drains the insular region and joins the anterior cerebral and striate veins to form a basal vein. Regions drained by the anterior cerebral and striate veins correspond approximately to those supplied by the anterior cerebral artery and the central branches which enter the anterior perforated substance. The basal veins pass back alongside the interpeduncular fossa and midbrain, receive tributaries from this vicinity and join the great cerebral vein.</div></section><section><a id="s2740"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2195">Inferior cerebral veins</h5><div class="textfl" id="p3275">Inferior cerebral veins on the orbital surface of the frontal lobe join the superior cerebral veins and thus drain to the superior sagittal sinus. Those on the temporal lobe anastomose with basal veins and middle cerebral veins, and drain to the cavernous, superior petrosal and transverse sinuses.</div></section><section><a id="s2745"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2200">Basal vein</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3280">The basal vein begins at the anterior perforated substance by the union of a small anterior cerebral vein, which accompanies the anterior cerebral artery, a deep middle cerebral vein, which receives tributaries from the insula and neighbouring gyri and runs in the lateral cerebral fissure, and striate veins, which emerge from the anterior perforated substance. The basal vein passes back round the cerebral peduncle to the great cerebral vein and receives tributaries from the interpeduncular fossa, inferior horn of the lateral ventricle, parahippocampal gyrus and midbrain.</div></section><section><a id="s2750"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2205">Internal cerebral vein</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3285">The internal cerebral vein drains the deep parts of the hemisphere and the choroid plexuses of the third and lateral ventricles. It is formed near the interventricular foramen, behind the column of the fornix, primarily by union of the thalamostriate and choroidal veins, although numerous smaller veins from surrounding structures also converge here.</div></section><section><a id="s2755"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2210">Thalamostriate vein</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3290">The thalamostriate vein runs anteriorly, between the caudate nucleus and thalamus, and receives many tributaries from both.</div></section><section><a id="s2760"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2215">Choroidal vein</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3295">The choroidal vein runs a convoluted course along the whole choroid plexus, and receives veins from the hippocampus, fornix, corpus callosum and adjacent structures. After their formation, the two internal cerebral veins travel back parallel to one another beneath the splenium of the corpus callosum, where they unite to form the great cerebral vein.</div></section><section><a id="s2765"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2220">Great cerebral vein</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3300">The great cerebral vein is a short median vessel which curves sharply up around the splenium of the corpus callosum and opens into the anterior end of the straight sinus after receiving the right and left basal veins.</div></section></section><section><a id="s2770"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle2225">Brainstem</h5><div class="textfl" id="p3305">The veins of the brainstem form a superficial venous plexus deep to the arteries. Veins of the medulla oblongata drain into the veins of the spinal cord or the adjacent dural venous sinuses, or into variable radicular veins that accompany the last four cranial nerves to either the inferior petrosal or occipital sinuses, or to the superior bulb of the jugular vein. Anterior and posterior median medullary veins may run along the ventral median fissure and dorsal median sulcus, to become continuous with the spinal veins in corresponding positions. Pontine veins, which may include a median vein and a lateral vein on each side, drain into the basal vein, cerebellar veins, the petrosal or transverse sinuses or the venous plexus of the foramen ovale. Veins of the midbrain join the great cerebral vein (of Galen) or the basal vein.</div><div class="text" id="p3310">The veins of the cerebellum drain mainly into sinuses adjacent to them or, from the superior surface, into the great cerebral vein. The cerebellar veins course on the cerebellar surface, and consist of superior and inferior groups. Superior cerebellar veins either run anteromedially across the superior vermis to the straight sinus or great cerebral vein, or they run laterally to the transverse and superior petrosal sinuses. Inferior cerebellar veins include a small median vessel that runs backwards on the inferior vermis to enter the straight or sigmoid sinus. Laterally coursing vessels join the inferior petrosal and occipital sinuses.</div></section><section><a id="s2775"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle2230">Spinal cord</h5><div class="textfl" id="p3315">Intramedullary veins within the substance of the spinal cord drain into a circumferential plexus of surface veins, the coronal plexus (venous plexus of the pia mater). Six tortuous longitudinal channels are usually identified within this plexus: anterior and posterior spinal veins (anterior and posterior median veins) and four others that run on either side of the ventral and dorsal nerve roots (see <a href="../B9780702077050000471/B9780702077050000471.xhtml#f0090">Fig. 47.15</a>). Only the anterior spinal vein, which drains the central grey matter, is consistently complete. It receives sulcal veins and small pial veins from the coronal plexus and is largest in calibre in the lumbosacral region. The posterior spinal vein is frequently variable, appearing plexiform in some segments and as a single channel in others. These vessels connect freely and drain superiorly into the cerebellar veins and cranial sinuses, and segmentally into medullary veins mainly. The segmental veins drain into the intervertebral veins and thence into the external vertebral venous plexuses (see <a href="../B978070207705000046X/B978070207705000046X.xhtml#f0120">Fig. 46.21</a>), the caval and azygos systems.</div><section><a id="s2780"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2235">Segmental veins</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3320">Anterior and posterior radiculomedullary veins run along some of the ventral and dorsal roots. Like the medullary feeder arteries, they are largest in the cervical and lumbar regions of the cord, but do not necessarily occur in the same segments as the medullary feeders. They drain the cord but not the roots themselves. Very small anterior and posterior radicular veins occur in most spinal segments, accompanying and draining the ventral and dorsal roots and some of the cord at the points of entry and exit of the rootlets; they usually drain into the intervertebral veins.</div></section></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s2785"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle2240">Venous Drainage of the Vertebral Column</h2><div class="textfl" id="p3325">Veins draining the vertebral column form intricate plexuses along the entire column, external and internal to the vertebral canal (see <a href="../B978070207705000046X/B978070207705000046X.xhtml#f0120">Fig. 46.21</a>) (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib102" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_102">Groen et al 2004</a>). Both groups are devoid of valves, anastomose freely with each other, and join the intervertebral veins. Interconnections are widely established between these plexuses and longitudinal veins early in fetal life. When development is complete, the plexuses drain into the caval and azygos/ascending lumbar systems via named veins that accompany the arteries described above.</div><div class="text" id="p3330">The veins also communicate with cranial dural venous sinuses and with the deep veins of the neck and pelvis. The venous complexes associated with the vertebral column can dilate considerably, and can form alternative routes of venous return in patients with major venous obstruction in the neck, chest or abdomen. The absence of valves allows pathways for the wide and sometimes paradoxical spread of malignant disease and sepsis. Pressure changes in the body cavities are transmitted through these venous plexuses and thus to the cerebrospinal fluid, though the cord itself may be protected from such congestion by valves in the small veins that drain from the cord into the internal vertebral plexus.</div><section><a id="s9790"/><section><a id="s2790"/><section><a id="s2795"/><section><a id="s2800"/><h3 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2245">External vertebral venous plexuses</h3><div class="textfl" id="p3335">The external vertebral venous plexuses are anterior and posterior. They anastomose freely, and are most developed in the cervical region. Anterior external plexuses are anterior to the vertebral bodies, communicate with basivertebral and intervertebral veins, and receive tributaries <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E106" id="pagebreak_1.464E106"/><a id="pg1464.e104"/>from vertebral bodies. Posterior external plexuses lie posterior to the vertebral laminae and around spines and transverse and articular processes. They anastomose with the internal plexuses and join the vertebral, posterior intercostal and lumbar veins.</div></section><section><a id="s2805"/><h4 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2250">Internal vertebral venous plexuses</h4><div class="textfl" id="p3340">The internal vertebral venous plexuses are embedded in epidural fat, supported by a network of collagenous fibres (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib53" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_53">Chaynes et al 1998</a>). These thin-walled channels receive tributaries from the bones, red bone marrow and spinal cord. They form a denser network than the external plexuses and are arranged vertically as four interconnecting longitudinal vessels: two anterior and two posterior.</div><div class="text" id="p3345">The anterior internal plexuses are large plexiform veins on the posterior surfaces of the vertebral bodies and intervertebral discs. They flank the posterior longitudinal ligament, beneath which they are connected by transverse vessels into which the large basivertebral veins open. The posterior internal plexuses, on each side in front of the vertebral arches and ligamenta flava, anastomose with the posterior external plexuses via veins that pass through and between the ligaments. The internal plexuses interconnect by venous rings near each vertebra. Around the foramen magnum, they form a dense network connecting with vertebral veins, occipital and sigmoid sinuses, the basilar plexus, the venous plexus of the hypoglossal canal and the condylar emissary veins.</div></section><section><a id="s2810"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2255">Basivertebral veins</h5><div class="textfl" id="p3350">The basivertebral veins are paired valveless veins that drain the pars spongiosa of the vertebral bodies into the internal and external vertebral venous plexuses. In each segment, they emerge horizontally from foramina in the vertebral bodies. Posteriorly, they drain into the transverse branches of the anterior internal vertebral plexuses. Anteriorly, they drain directly into the anterior external vertebral venous plexus. The basivertebral veins enlarge in advanced age.</div></section><section><a id="s2815"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle2260">Intervertebral veins</h6><div class="textfl" id="p3355">Branches of the anterior internal plexuses drain into retrocorporal veins that join the posterior internal venous plexuses to form intervertebral veins. As their name suggests, these veins accompany the spinal nerves through intervertebral foramina; they drain in craniocaudal sequence into the vertebral, posterior intercostal, lumbar and lateral sacral veins. Upper posterior intercostal veins may drain into the caval system via brachiocephalic veins, whereas the lower intercostals drain into the azygos system. Lumbar veins are joined longitudinally in front of the transverse processes by the ascending lumbar veins, in which they may terminate. Alternatively, they may proceed around the vertebral bodies to drain into the inferior vena cava. Whether the basivertebral or intervertebral veins contain effective valves is uncertain but experimental evidence strongly suggests that their blood flow can be reversed (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib16" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_16">Batson 1957</a>). This may explain how pelvic neoplasms, e.g. carcinoma of the prostate, may metastasize in vertebral bodies: the cells spread into the internal vertebral plexuses via their connections with the pelvic veins when blood flow is temporarily reversed by raised intra-abdominal pressure or postural alterations (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib234" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_234">Pearce 2006</a>).</div></section></section></section></section></section></body></html>