<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html lang="EN" xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head><meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/><title>Gray's Anatomy</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../Style/Elsevier_eBook.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" media="only screen" href="../../Style/media.css"/></head><body><section role="doc-chapter" epub:type="chapter"><div id="CN"><a id="c0081"/></div><h1 class="chaptitle" epub:type="title" id="B9780702077050000811">Chapter 81: The anatomy of the vascular and lymphatic systems</h1><section><div class="textfl" id="p8010">This chapter brings together the regional descriptions of the arteries, veins and lymphatic vessels and their draining nodes that appear in the relevant sections of <a href="../B9780702077050000240/B9780702077050000240.xhtml">chapters 24</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000793/B9780702077050000793.xhtml">79</a>. The text is not illustrated: all cross-referenced figures and videos are HTML-linked to the corresponding figure or video in the appropriate chapter in the eBook.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0010"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle0010">Arterial Supply of the Head and Neck</h2><div class="textfl" id="p9010">The head and neck and the brain are supplied by the carotid system of arteries and by many, but not all, of the branches of the subclavian arteries. The carotid system is described here. The subclavian artery is described on <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_split_a.xhtml#pg1464.e83">pages 1464.e83</a> et seq.</div><section><a id="s0015"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle0015">Carotid system of arteries</h3><div class="textfl" id="p0010">The right and left common carotid arteries supply the head and neck Both ascend to just above the level of the upper border of the thyroid cartilage, where each divides into an external carotid artery that supplies the external head, face and most of the neck, and an internal carotid artery that supplies the cranial and orbital contents.</div><section><a id="s0020"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0020">Common carotid arteries</h4><div class="textfl" id="p0015">The right and left common carotid arteries differ in their length and origin. The right is exclusively cervical and usually arises from the brachiocephalic trunk posterior to the superior part of the right sternoclavicular joint, or immediately superior to the joint, but it may be a separate branch from the aorta. The left originates directly from the aortic arch immediately posterolateral to the brachiocephalic trunk and therefore has both thoracic and cervical parts (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0045">Figs 35.8</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0025">57.4</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000586/B9780702077050000586.xhtml#f0010">58.1</a>). Its thoracic part (2.0–2.5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm long) lies initially anterior and then to the left side of the trachea as it ascends to enter the neck by passing through the superior thoracic aperture, posterior to the left sternoclavicular joint.</div><div class="text" id="p0020">In the neck, the right and left common carotid arteries follow a similar course. They ascend, diverging laterally from behind the sternoclavicular joint to the level of the upper border of the thyroid cartilage of the larynx (C3–C4 junction), where each divides into external and internal carotid arteries. This bifurcation can sometimes be at a higher or lower level (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0040">Fig. 35.7B</a>). The angle of bifurcation remains unchanged from infancy to adulthood. However, there is a significant change in the angle of the split between the internal and the external carotid arteries relative to the common carotid artery (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib272" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_272">Seong et al 2005</a>). The artery may be compressed against the prominent transverse process of the sixth cervical vertebra (Chassaignac’s tubercle); above this level it is superficial, and its pulsation can be easily felt.</div><div class="text" id="p0025">In the lower part of the neck, the common carotid arteries are separated by a narrow gap that contains the trachea. Above this, the arteries are separated by the thyroid gland, larynx and pharynx. Each artery is contained within the carotid sheath of deep cervical fascia, which also encloses the internal jugular vein and vagus nerve, the vein lying lateral to the artery, and the nerve lying between them and posterior to both.</div><section><a id="s0025"/><section><a id="s0030"/><section><a id="s0035"/><section><a id="s0040"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle0025">Relations</p><div class="textfl" id="p0030">At the level of the cricoid cartilage the common carotid artery is crossed anterolaterally by the intermediate tendon, or sometimes the superior belly, of omohyoid. Below omohyoid, it is sited deeply, and covered by skin, superficial fascia, platysma, deep cervical fascia and sternocleidomastoid, sternohyoid and sternothyroid. Above omohyoid, it is more superficial, and covered merely by skin, superficial fascia, platysma, deep cervical fascia and the medial margin of sternocleidomastoid; it is crossed obliquely from its medial to lateral side by the sternocleidomastoid branch of the superior thyroid artery. The superior root of the ansa cervicalis, joined by its inferior root from the second and third cervical spinal nerves, lies anterior to, or embedded within, the carotid sheath as it crosses it obliquely. The superior thyroid vein usually crosses near the upper border of the thyroid cartilage, and the middle thyroid vein crosses a little below the level of the cricoid cartilage. The anterior jugular vein crosses the common carotid artery above the clavicle, separated from it by sternohyoid and sternothyroid. Posterior to the carotid sheath are the transverse processes of the fourth to sixth cervical vertebrae, to which are attached longus colli, longus capitis and tendinous slips of scalenus anterior. The sympathetic trunk and ascending cervical branch of the inferior thyroid artery lie between the common carotid artery and the muscles. Below the level of the sixth cervical vertebra, the artery is in an angle between scalenus anterior and longus colli, anterior to the vertebral vessels, inferior thyroid and subclavian arteries, sympathetic trunk and, on the left, the thoracic duct. The oesophagus, trachea, inferior thyroid artery, recurrent laryngeal nerve and, at a higher level, the larynx and pharynx are medial to the sheath and its contents. The thyroid gland overlaps it anteromedially. The internal jugular vein lies lateral and, in the lower neck, also anterior to the artery, while the vagus nerve lies posterolaterally in the angle between the artery and vein.</div><div class="text" id="p0035">On the right side, low in the neck, the recurrent laryngeal nerve crosses obliquely behind the artery. The right internal jugular vein diverges from it below but the left vein approaches and often overlaps its artery.</div><div class="text" id="p0040">Although the common carotid artery usually has no branches, it may occasionally give rise to the vertebral, superior thyroid, superior laryngeal, ascending pharyngeal, inferior thyroid or occipital arteries.</div></section><section><a id="s0045"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle0030">Variants</p><div class="textfl" id="p0045">The origin of the arteries may vary: both common carotid arteries may emerge from the brachiocephalic trunk (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib225" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_225">Panagouli et al 2018</a>), or separately from the aorta, or from a common trunk (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib3" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_3">Akgun et al 2016</a>). The left common carotid artery varies in origin more than the right. Either common carotid artery may bifurcate higher, near the level of the hyoid bone, or, more rarely, at a lower level alongside the larynx. Very rarely, the common carotid artery ascends without division, so that either the external or internal carotid artery is absent, or separate external and internal carotid arteries may arise directly from the aorta, unilaterally or bilaterally.</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s0050"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0035">Carotid sinus and carotid body</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0050">The common carotid artery has two specialized organs near its bifurcation: the carotid sinus and the carotid body. They relay information concerning the pressure and chemical composition of the arterial blood, respectively, and are innervated principally by the carotid branch(es) of the glossopharyngeal nerve, with small contributions from the cervical sympathetic trunk and the vagus nerve.</div><div class="text" id="p0055">The carotid sinus usually appears as a dilation of the lower end of the internal carotid in late adolescence (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib272" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Seong et al 2005</a>) and functions as a baroreceptor.</div><div class="text" id="p0060">The carotid body is a reddish-brown, oval structure, 5–7<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm in height and 2.5–4<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm in width. It lies either posterior to the carotid bifurcation or between its branches, and is attached to, or sometimes partly embedded in, their adventitia. Occasionally it takes the form of a group of separate nodules. Aberrant miniature carotid bodies, microstructurally similar but with diameters of 600<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>μm or less, may appear in the adventitia and adipose tissue near the carotid sinus.</div><div class="text" id="p0065">The carotid body is surrounded by a fibrous capsule, from which septa divide the enclosed tissue into lobules. Each lobule contains glomus (type I) cells, which are separated from an extensive network of fenestrated sinusoids by sustentacular (type II) cells (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0055">Fig. 35.10</a>). Glomus cells store a number of peptides, particularly enkephalins, bombesin and neurotensin, and amines including dopamine, serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT), adrenaline (epinephrine) and noradrenaline (norepinephrine), and are therefore regarded as paraneurones. Unmyelinated axons lie in a collagenous matrix between the sustentacular cells and the sinusoidal endothelium, and many synapse on the glomus cells. They are visceral afferents, which travel in the carotid sinus nerve to join the glossopharyngeal nerve. Preganglionic sympathetic axons and fibres from the carotid sinus synapse on parasympathetic and sympathetic ganglion cells, which lie either in isolation or in small groups near the surface of each carotid body. Postganglionic axons travel to local blood vessels; the parasympathetic efferent fibres are probably vasodilatory and the sympathetic ones are vasoconstrictor.<a id="pg1464.e57"/></div><div><span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E59" id="pagebreak_1.464E59"></span></div><div class="text" id="p0070">The carotid body receives a rich blood supply from branches of the adjacent external carotid artery, which is consistent with its role as an arterial chemoreceptor. When stimulated by hypoxia, hypercapnia or increased hydrogen ion concentration (low pH) in the blood flowing through it, it elicits reflex increases in the rate and volume of ventilation via connections with brainstem respiratory centres. The bodies are most prominent in children and normally involute in older age, when they are infiltrated by lymphocytes and fibrous tissue. Individuals with chronic hypoxia, or who live at high altitude or suffer from lung disease, may have enlarged carotid bodies as a result of hyperplasia. Disrupted carotid body maturation may play a role in sudden infant death syndrome (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib241" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_241">Porzionato et al 2013</a>). Benign and malignant paragangliomas develop in association with succinyl dehydrogenase mutations (SDH).</div><div class="text" id="p0075">Other small bodies, resembling carotid bodies and also considered to be chemoreceptors, are present near the arteries of the fourth and sixth pharyngeal arches and hence are found near the aortic arch, ligamentum arteriosum and right subclavian artery; they are supplied by the vagus nerve.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0055"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0040">External carotid artery</h4><div class="textfl" id="p0080">The external carotid artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0040">Figs 35.7A</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0045">35.8</a>) begins lateral to the upper border of the thyroid cartilage, level with the intervertebral disc between the third and fourth cervical vertebrae. A little curved and with a gentle spiral, it first ascends slightly forwards and then inclines backwards and a little laterally, to pass midway between the tip of the mastoid process and the angle of the mandible. Here, in the substance of the parotid gland behind the neck of the mandible, it divides into its terminal branches, the superficial temporal and maxillary arteries. As it ascends, it gives off several large branches and diminishes rapidly in calibre. In children the external carotid is smaller than the internal carotid, but in adults the two are of almost equal size. At its origin, it is in the carotid triangle and lies anteromedial to the internal carotid artery. It later becomes anterior, then lateral, to the internal carotid as it ascends. At mandibular levels, the styloid process and its attached structures intervene between the vessels; the internal carotid is deep, and the external carotid superficial, to the styloid process. A fingertip placed in the carotid triangle perceives a powerful arterial pulsation, which represents the termination of the common carotid, the origins of external and internal carotids, and the stems of the initial branches of the external carotid.</div><section><a id="s0060"/><section><a id="s0065"/><section><a id="s0070"/><section><a id="s0075"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle0045">Relations</p><div class="textfl" id="p0085">The skin and superficial fascia, the loop between the cervical branch of the facial nerve and the transverse cutaneous nerve of the neck, the deep cervical fascia and the anterior margin of sternocleidomastoid all lie superficial to the external carotid artery in the carotid triangle. The artery is crossed by the hypoglossal nerve and its vena comitans, and by the lingual, facial and, sometimes, the superior thyroid veins. Leaving the carotid triangle, the external carotid artery is crossed by the posterior belly of digastric and by stylohyoid; it ascends between these muscles and the posteromedial surface of the parotid gland, which it next enters. Within the parotid, the artery lies medial to the facial nerve and the junction of the superficial temporal and maxillary veins. The pharyngeal wall, superior laryngeal nerve and ascending pharyngeal artery are the initial medial relations of the artery. At a higher level, it is separated from the internal carotid artery by the styloid process, styloglossus and stylopharyngeus, glossopharyngeal nerve, pharyngeal branch of vagus nerve and part of the parotid gland. The artery is equally likely to lie medial to the parotid gland, or within it.</div><div class="text" id="p0090">The external carotid artery has eight named branches distributed to the head and neck. The superior thyroid, lingual and facial arteries arise from its anterior surface, the occipital and posterior auricular arteries arise from its posterior surface, and the ascending pharyngeal artery arises from its medial surface. The maxillary and superficial temporal arteries are its terminal branches within the parotid gland.</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s0080"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0050">Ascending pharyngeal artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0095">The ascending pharyngeal artery is the first and smallest branch of the external carotid artery. It is a long, slender vessel that arises from the medial (deep) surface of the external carotid artery near the origin of that artery. It is important that it is identified and preserved if the external carotid is being ligated because of its potential to supply to a compromised internal carotid circulation.</div><div class="text" id="p0100">The ascending pharyngeal artery ascends between the internal carotid artery and the pharynx to the base of the cranium, crossed by styloglossus and stylopharyngeus; longus capitis is posterior. It gives off numerous small branches to supply longus capitis and longus colli, the sympathetic trunk, the hypoglossal, glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves, and some of the cervical lymph nodes. It anastomoses with the ascending palatine branch of the facial artery and the ascending cervical branch of the inferior thyroid artery.</div><div class="text" id="p0105">The ascending pharyngeal artery has the following named branches: pharyngeal, inferior tympanic and meningeal arteries.</div><section><a id="s0085"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0055">Pharyngeal artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0110">The pharyngeal artery gives off three or four branches to supply the constrictor muscles of the pharynx and stylopharyngeus. A variable ramus supplies the palate and may replace the ascending palatine branch of the facial artery. The artery descends forwards between the superior border of the superior constrictor and levator veli palatini to the soft palate, and also supplies a branch to the palatine tonsil and the pharyngotympanic tube.</div></section><section><a id="s0090"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0060">Inferior tympanic artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0115">The inferior tympanic artery is a small branch that traverses the temporal canaliculus with the tympanic branch of the glossopharyngeal nerve and supplies the medial wall of the tympanic cavity.</div></section><section><a id="s0095"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0065">Meningeal arteries</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0120">The meningeal arteries are small vessels that supply the nerves that traverse the foramen lacerum, jugular foramen and hypoglossal canal, and the associated dura mater and adjoining bone. One branch, the posterior meningeal artery, reaches the cerebellar fossa via the jugular foramen and is usually regarded as the terminal branch of the ascending pharyngeal artery.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0100"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0070">Superior thyroid artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0125">The superior thyroid artery is the second branch of the external carotid artery. It arises from the anterior surface of the external carotid just below the level of the greater cornu of the hyoid bone (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0040">Figs 35.7A</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0045">35.8</a>). It descends along the lateral border of thyrohyoid to reach the apex of the lobe of the thyroid gland. The inferior constrictor muscle and the external laryngeal nerve are medial. The nerve is often posteromedial, and therefore at risk when the artery is being ligated, and occasionally it may issue directly from the common carotid.</div><div class="text" id="p0130">The superior thyroid artery supplies the thyroid gland and some adjacent skin. Branches to the gland are anterior, running along the medial side of the upper pole of the lateral lobe to supply mainly the anterior surface; a branch that crosses above the isthmus to anastomose with its contralateral fellow; and posterior, descending on the posterior border to supply the medial and lateral surfaces and anastomose with the inferior thyroid artery. A lateral branch sometimes supplies the lateral surface. The superior thyroid artery is often accompanied by the external branch of the superior laryngeal nerve: care should be taken to preserve this nerve when ligating the superior thyroid artery during surgery because it supplies cricothyroid, and iatrogenic damage affects vocal cord function.</div><div class="text" id="p0135">Named branches of the superior thyroid artery are the infrahyoid, superior laryngeal, sternocleidomastoid and cricothyroid.</div><section><a id="s0105"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0075">Infrahyoid artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0140">The infrahyoid artery is a small branch that runs along the lower border of the hyoid bone deep to thyrohyoid and anastomoses with its fellow of the opposite side to supply the infrahyoid strap muscles.</div></section><section><a id="s0110"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0080">Superior laryngeal artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0145">The superior laryngeal artery accompanies the internal laryngeal nerve. Deep to thyrohyoid, it pierces the lower part of the thyrohyoid membrane to supply the tissues of the upper part of the larynx. It anastomoses with its fellow of the opposite side and with the inferior laryngeal branch of the inferior thyroid artery.</div></section><section><a id="s0115"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0085">Sternocleidomastoid artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0150">The sternocleidomastoid artery descends laterally across the carotid sheath and supplies the middle region of sternocleidomastoid. Like the parent artery itself, it may arise directly from the external carotid artery.</div></section><section><a id="s0120"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0090">Cricothyroid artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0155">The cricothyroid artery crosses high on the anterior cricothyroid ligament, anastomoses with its fellow of the opposite side and supplies cricothyroid.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0125"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0095">Lingual artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0160">The lingual artery provides the chief blood supply to the tongue and the floor of the mouth (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0045">Fig. 35.8</a>). It arises anteromedially from the external carotid artery opposite the tip of the greater cornu of the hyoid bone, between the superior thyroid and facial arteries. It often arises with the facial or, less often, with the superior thyroid artery. It <a id="pg1464.e58"/>may be replaced by a ramus of the maxillary artery. Ascending medially at first, it loops down and forwards, passes medial to the posterior border of hyoglossus and then runs horizontally forwards deep to it, accompanied by the lingual veins and the glossopharyngeal nerve. At the anterior border of hyoglossus, the lingual artery bends sharply upwards (see <a href="../B9780702077050000379/B9780702077050000379.xhtml#f0065">Fig. 37.11A</a>). It is covered by the mucosa of the tongue and lies between genioglossus medially and the inferior longitudinal muscle laterally. Near the tip of the tongue, it anastomoses with its contralateral fellow; this contribution is important in maintaining the blood supply to the tongue in any surgical resection of the tongue. The branches of the lingual artery form a rich anastomotic network, which supplies the musculature of the tongue, and a very dense submucosal plexus. Named branches of the lingual artery in the floor of the mouth are the dorsal lingual, sublingual and deep lingual arteries.</div><div><span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E60" id="pagebreak_1.464E60"></span></div><section><a id="s0130"/><section><a id="s0135"/><section><a id="s0140"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle0100">Relations</p><div class="textfl" id="p0165">Its relationship to hyoglossus naturally divides the lingual artery into descriptive ‘thirds’. In its first part, the lingual artery is in the carotid triangle. Skin, fascia and platysma are superficial to it, while the middle pharyngeal constrictor muscle is medial. The artery ascends a little medially, then descends to the level of the hyoid bone, and the loop so formed is crossed externally by the hypoglossal nerve. The second part passes along the upper border of the hyoid bone, deep to hyoglossus, the tendons of digastric and stylohyoid, the lower part of the submandibular gland and the posterior part of mylohyoid. Hyoglossus separates it from the hypoglossal nerve and its vena comitans. Here, its medial aspect adjoins the middle constrictor muscle and it crosses the stylohyoid ligament accompanied by lingual veins. The third part is the arteria profunda linguae, which turns upwards near the anterior border of hyoglossus and then passes forwards close to the inferior lingual surface near the frenulum, accompanied by the lingual nerve. Genioglossus is a medial relation, and the inferior longitudinal muscle of the tongue lies lateral to it below the lingual mucous membrane. Near the tip of the tongue, the lingual artery anastomoses with its fellow of the opposite side. Its named branches are the suprahyoid, dorsal lingual and sublingual arteries.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s0145"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0105">Suprahyoid artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0170">The suprahyoid artery is a small branch that runs along the upper border of the hyoid bone to anastomose with the contralateral artery and supply adjacent structures.</div></section><section><a id="s0150"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0110">Dorsal lingual arteries</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0175">There are usually two or three small dorsal lingual arteries. They arise medial to hyoglossus and ascend to the posterior part of the dorsum of the tongue. They supply its mucous membrane and the palatoglossal arch, tonsil, soft palate and epiglottis and anastomose with their contralateral fellows.</div></section><section><a id="s0155"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0115">Sublingual artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0180">The sublingual artery arises at the anterior margin of hyoglossus. It passes forwards between genioglossus and mylohyoid to the sublingual gland, and supplies the gland, mylohyoid and the buccal and gingival mucous membranes. One branch pierces mylohyoid and joins the submental branches of the facial artery. Another branch courses through the mandibular gingivae to anastomose with its contralateral fellow. A single artery arises from this anastomosis and enters a small foramen (lingual foramen) on the mandible, situated in the midline on the posterior aspect of the symphysis immediately above the genial tubercles.</div></section><section><a id="s0160"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0120">Deep lingual artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0185">The deep lingual artery is the terminal part of the lingual artery and is found on the inferior surface of the tongue near the lingual frenulum.</div><div class="text" id="p0190">In addition to the lingual artery, the tonsillar and ascending palatine branches of the facial and ascending pharyngeal arteries also supply tissue in the root of the tongue. In the region of the valleculae, epiglottic branches of the superior laryngeal artery anastomose with the inferior dorsal branches of the lingual artery.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0165"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0125">Facial artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0195">The facial artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0040">Figs 35.7</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0045">35.8</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000367/B9780702077050000367.xhtml#f0095">36.25</a>) arises anteriorly from the external carotid in the carotid triangle, above the lingual artery and immediately above the greater cornu of the hyoid bone. In the neck, at its origin, it is covered only by the skin, platysma, fasciae and often by the hypoglossal nerve. It runs up and forwards, deep to digastric and stylohyoid. At first on the middle pharyngeal constrictor, it may reach the lateral surface of styloglossus, separated there from the palatine tonsil only by this muscle and the lingual fibres of the superior constrictor. Medial to the mandibular ramus, it arches upwards and grooves the posterior aspect of the submandibular gland. It then turns down and descends to the lower border of the mandible in a lateral groove on the submandibular gland, between the gland and medial pterygoid. It initially lies beneath platysma and passes onto the face at the anteroinferior border of masseter, where its pulse can be felt as it crosses the mandible. The artery is deep to skin, the fat of the cheek and, near the angle of the mouth, zygomaticus major and risorius, and superficial to buccinator and levator anguli oris. It may pass over or through levator labii superioris and pursues a tortuous course along the side of the nose towards the medial corner of the eye. At its termination, it is embedded in levator labii superioris alaeque nasi.</div><div class="text" id="p0200">Occasionally the facial artery barely extends beyond the angle of the mouth, in which case its normal territory beyond this region is taken over by an enlarged transverse facial branch from the superficial temporal artery and by branches from the contralateral facial artery. The facial vein is posterior to the artery and runs a more direct course across the face. At the anterior border of masseter, the two vessels are in contact, whereas in the neck the vein is superficial to the artery. The facial artery supplies branches to the muscles and skin of the face (see <a href="../B9780702077050000367/B9780702077050000367.xhtml#f0105">Fig. 36.20</a>). The part of the artery distal to its terminal branch is called the angular artery.</div><div class="text" id="p0205">The facial artery is very sinuous throughout its extent. In the neck, this may be so that the artery is able to adapt to the movements of the pharynx during deglutition, and similarly on the face, so that the artery can adapt to movements of the mandible, lips and cheeks. Facial artery pulsation is most palpable where the artery crosses the mandibular base, and again near the corner of the mouth. There are four branches within the neck and four on the face. The named branches in the neck are the ascending palatine, tonsillar, submental and glandular arteries. The named branches on the face are the premasseteric, inferior and superior labial, and lateral nasal arteries.</div><section><a id="s0170"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0130">Ascending palatine artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0210">The ascending palatine artery arises close to the origin of the facial artery. It passes up between styloglossus and stylopharyngeus to reach the side of the pharynx, along which it ascends between the superior constrictor of the pharynx and medial pterygoid towards the cranial base. It bifurcates near levator veli palatini. One branch follows this muscle, winding over the upper border of the superior constrictor of the pharynx to supply the soft palate and to anastomose with its fellow of the opposite side and the greater palatine branch of the maxillary artery. The other branch pierces the superior constrictor muscle to supply the tonsil and pharyngotympanic tube, and to anastomose with the tonsillar and ascending pharyngeal arteries (see <a href="../B9780702077050000409/B9780702077050000409.xhtml#f0040">Fig. 40.7</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0175"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0135">Tonsillar artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0215">The tonsillar artery provides the main blood supply to the palatine tonsil. It ascends between medial pterygoid and styloglossus, penetrates the superior constrictor of the pharynx at the upper border of styloglossus, and enters the inferior pole of the tonsil. Its branches ramify in the tonsil and in the musculature of the posterior part of the tongue. The tonsillar artery may sometimes arise from the ascending palatine artery.</div></section><section><a id="s0180"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0140">Submental artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0220">The submental artery is the largest cervical branch of the facial artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0040">Fig. 35.7A</a>). It arises as the facial artery separates from the submandibular gland and turns forwards on mylohyoid below the mandible. It supplies the overlying skin and muscles, and anastomoses with a sublingual branch of the lingual and mylohyoid branch of the inferior alveolar artery. At the chin, it ascends over the mandible and divides into superficial and deep branches that anastomose with the inferior labial and mental arteries to supply the chin and lower lip.</div></section><section><a id="s0185"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0145">Glandular branches</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0225">Three or four large vessels supply the submandibular salivary gland and associated lymph nodes, adjacent muscles and skin.</div></section><section><a id="s0190"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0150">Premasseteric artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0230">The premasseteric artery is small and inconstant. When present, it passes upwards along the anterior border of masseter and supplies the surrounding tissues.</div></section><section><a id="s0195"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0155">Inferior labial artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0235">The inferior labial artery arises near the angle of the mouth, passes upwards and forwards under depressor anguli oris, and then penetrates orbicularis oris to run sinuously near the margin of the lower lip, between the muscle and the mucous membrane. It supplies the inferior labial glands, mucous membrane and muscles, and anastomoses with its contralateral fellow and with the mental branch of the inferior alveolar artery.<a id="pg1464.e59"/></div><div><span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E61" id="pagebreak_1.464E61"></span></div></section><section><a id="s0200"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0160">Superior labial artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0240">The superior labial artery is larger and more tortuous than the inferior labial artery. It pursues a similar course along the superior labial margin, between the mucous membrane and orbicularis oris, anastomoses with its contralateral fellow, and supplies the upper lip. It gives off an alar branch and a septal branch that ramifies anteroinferiorly in the nasal septum.</div></section><section><a id="s0205"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0165">Lateral nasal artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0245">The lateral nasal artery is given off by the side of the nose, supplies the dorsum and ala of the nose, and anastomoses with its contralateral fellow. The lateral nasal artery can be replaced by a branch from the superior labial artery.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0210"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0170">Occipital artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0250">The occipital artery arises posteriorly from the external carotid artery, approximately 2<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm from its origin (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0040">Figs 35.7A</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0045">35.8</a>). At its origin, the artery is crossed superficially by the hypoglossal nerve, which winds round it from behind. The artery next passes backwards, up and deep to the posterior belly of digastric, and crosses the internal carotid artery, internal jugular vein, and hypoglossal, vagus and accessory nerves. Between the transverse process of the atlas and the mastoid process, the occipital artery reaches the lateral border of rectus capitis lateralis. It then runs in the occipital groove of the temporal bone, medial to the mastoid process and attachments of sternocleidomastoid, splenius capitis, longissimus capitis and digastric, and lies successively on rectus capitis lateralis, obliquus superior and semispinalis capitis. Accompanied by the greater occipital nerve, it finally turns upwards to pierce the investing layer of the deep cervical fascia that connects the cranial attachments of trapezius and sternocleidomastoid. Accompanied by the greater occipital nerve, the occipital artery enters the posterior scalp by piercing the investing layer of deep cervical fascia that connects the cranial attachments of trapezius and sternocleidomastoid. It gives off many tortuous branches that run between the skin and the occipital belly of occipitofrontalis, anastomosing with the contralateral occipital, posterior auricular and superficial temporal arteries, as well as with the transverse cervical branch of the subclavian artery. These branches supply the occipital belly of occipitofrontalis and the skin and pericranium associated with the scalp as far forwards as the vertex. The artery may give off a meningeal branch that traverses the parietal foramen.</div><div class="text" id="p0255">The occipital artery has two main branches (superior and inferior) to the upper part of sternocleidomastoid in the neck. The inferior branch arises near the origin of the occipital artery and may sometimes arise directly from the external carotid artery. It descends backwards over the hypoglossal nerve and internal jugular vein, enters sternocleidomastoid and anastomoses with the sternocleidomastoid branch of the superior thyroid artery. The superior branch arises as the occipital artery crosses the accessory nerve and runs down and backwards superficial to the internal jugular vein. It enters the deep surface of sternocleidomastoid with the accessory nerve.</div></section><section><a id="s0215"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0175">Posterior auricular artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0260">The posterior auricular artery is a small vessel that branches posteriorly from the external carotid just above digastric and stylohyoid. It ascends between the parotid gland and the styloid process to the groove between the auricular cartilage and mastoid process. It supplies the cranial surface of the auricle via its auricular branch, and the occipital belly of occipitofrontalis and the scalp behind and above the auricle via its occipital branch and anastomoses with the occipital artery.</div><div class="text" id="p0265">In the neck, it provides branches that supply digastric, stylohyoid, sternocleidomastoid and the parotid gland. It also gives origin to the stylomastoid artery (described as an indirect branch of the posterior auricular artery in about a third of subjects) that enters the stylomastoid foramen to supply the facial nerve, tympanic cavity, mastoid antrum air cells and semicircular canals. In the young, its posterior tympanic ramus forms a circular anastomosis with the anterior tympanic branch of the maxillary artery.</div></section><section><a id="s0220"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0180">Superficial temporal artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0270">The superficial temporal artery is the smaller terminal branch of the external carotid artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000331/B9780702077050000331.xhtml#f0015">Figs 33.1A</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000367/B9780702077050000367.xhtml#f0070">36.20</a>). It arises in the parotid gland behind the neck of the mandible, where it is crossed by temporal and zygomatic branches of the facial nerve. Initially deep, it becomes superficial as it passes over the posterior root of the zygomatic process of the temporal bone, where its pulse can be felt. It then ascends in the scalp for approximately 4<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm and divides into frontal (anterior) and parietal (posterior) branches. The artery is accompanied by corresponding veins, and by the auriculotemporal nerve that usually lies just posterior to it.</div><div class="text" id="p0275">The superficial temporal artery supplies the skin and muscles at the side of the face and in the scalp, the parotid gland and the temporomandibular joint. It is occasionally biopsied when a histological diagnosis of giant cell arteritis is required. The named branches of the superficial temporal artery are the transverse facial, auricular, zygomatico-orbital, middle temporal, frontal and parietal arteries. The relative sizes of the frontal, parietal and transverse facial branches vary: the frontal and parietal branches may be absent, whereas the transverse facial branch may replace a shortened transverse facial artery arising from the facial artery.</div><section><a id="s0225"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0185">Transverse facial artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0280">The transverse facial artery arises before the superficial temporal artery emerges from the parotid gland. It traverses the gland, crosses masseter between the parotid duct and the zygomatic arch (accompanied by one or two facial nerve branches), and divides into numerous branches that supply the parotid gland and duct, masseter and adjacent skin. The branches anastomose with the facial, masseteric, buccal, lacrimal and infraorbital arteries, and can have a direct origin from the external carotid artery.</div></section><section><a id="s0230"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0190">Auricular artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0285">The branches of the auricular artery are distributed to the lobule and lateral surface of the auricle and to the external acoustic meatus.</div></section><section><a id="s0235"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0195">Zygomatico-orbital artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0290">The zygomatico-orbital artery may arise independently from the superficial temporal artery or from its middle temporal or parietal branches. It runs close to the upper border of the zygomatic arch, between the two layers of temporal fascia, to the lateral orbital angle. It supplies orbicularis oculi and anastomoses with the lacrimal and palpebral branches of the ophthalmic artery. A well-developed zygomatico-orbital artery can be associated with a delayed division of the superficial temporal artery into frontal and parietal branches.</div></section><section><a id="s0240"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0200">Middle temporal artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0295">The middle temporal artery arises just above the zygomatic arch and perforates the temporal fascia to supply temporalis. It anastomoses with the deep temporal branches of the maxillary artery.</div></section><section><a id="s0245"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0205">Frontal (anterior) branch</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0300">The frontal branch passes upwards towards the frontal tuberosity and supplies the muscles, skin and pericranium in this region. It anastomoses with its contralateral fellow and with the supraorbital and supratrochlear branches of the ophthalmic artery.</div></section><section><a id="s0250"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0210">Parietal (posterior) branch</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0305">The parietal branch is larger than the frontal branch of the superficial temporal artery. It curves upwards and backwards, remains superficial to the temporal fascia, and anastomoses with its contralateral fellow and with the posterior auricular and occipital arteries.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0255"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0215">Maxillary artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0310">The maxillary artery is the larger terminal branch of the external carotid artery. It arises behind the neck of the mandible and is at first embedded in the parotid gland, then crosses the infratemporal fossa to enter the pterygopalatine fossa through the pterygomaxillary fissure. Within the pterygopalatine fossa, the maxillary artery and its branches lie in a plane anterior to the maxillary nerve, pterygopalatine ganglion and the nerve of the pterygoid canal: this spatial arrangement is particularly relevant in endoscopic approaches to the pterygopalatine fossa (see Video 38.2). The veins accompanying the third (pterygopalatine) part of the maxillary artery, in common with those accompanying the second (pterygoid) part, are in the form of a venous plexus and profuse haemorrhage may be encountered from this pterygopalatine venous plexus. The maxillary artery has a variable and tortuous course in its short passage through the pterygopalatine fossa, where it gives off numerous named branches, including the posterior superior alveolar and infraorbital arteries and the artery of the pterygoid canal (Vidian artery), and terminates in the sphenopalatine and greater palatine arteries.</div><div class="text" id="p0315">The maxillary artery is widely distributed to the mandible, maxilla, teeth, muscles of mastication, palate, nasal cavity and cranial dura mater (see <a href="../B9780702077050000380/B9780702077050000380.xhtml#f0065">Figs 38.20</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000380/B9780702077050000380.xhtml#f0070">38.21</a>). It is conventionally described in three parts: mandibular, pterygoid and pterygopalatine.</div><div class="text" id="p0320">The mandibular part runs horizontally by the medial surface of the ramus and passes between the neck of the mandible and the sphenomandibular ligament, parallel with and slightly below the auriculotemporal nerve. It next crosses the inferior alveolar nerve and skirts the lower border of lateral pterygoid. The pterygoid part ascends obliquely <a id="pg1464.e60"/>forwards medial to temporalis and is usually superficial to the lower head of lateral pterygoid. When it runs deep to lateral pterygoid, it lies between the muscle and branches of the mandibular nerve and may project as a lateral loop between the two parts of lateral pterygoid. Asymmetry in this pattern of distribution may occur between the right and left infratemporal fossae. Where the maxillary artery runs superficial to the lower head of lateral pterygoid, the most common pattern is that the artery passes lateral to the inferior alveolar, lingual and buccal nerves. Less frequently, only the buccal nerve crosses the artery laterally, and rarely the artery can pass deep to all the branches of the mandibular nerve. The pterygopalatine part passes between the two heads of lateral pterygoid to reach the pterygomaxillary fissure before it passes into the pterygopalatine fossa, where it terminates as the third part of the maxillary artery.</div><div><span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E62" id="pagebreak_1.464E62"></span></div><div class="text" id="p0325">The mandibular part of the maxillary artery has five branches that all enter bone. The named branches are the deep auricular, anterior tympanic, middle meningeal, accessory meningeal and inferior alveolar arteries.</div><div class="text" id="p0330">The pterygoid part of the maxillary artery has five branches that do not enter bone but supply muscle, and include the deep temporal, pterygoid, masseteric and buccal arteries.</div><div class="text" id="p0335">The branches of the pterygopalatine part of the artery accompany similarly named branches of the maxillary nerve (including those associated with the pterygopalatine ganglion) and include the posterior superior alveolar and infraorbital arteries, the artery of the pterygoid canal (Vidian artery), and the pharyngeal, greater (descending) palatine and sphenopalatine arteries.</div><section><a id="s0260"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0220">Deep auricular artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0340">The deep auricular artery pierces the osseous or cartilaginous wall of the external acoustic meatus and supplies the skin of the external acoustic meatus and part of the tympanic membrane. A small branch contributes to the arterial supply of the temporomandibular joint.</div></section><section><a id="s0265"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0225">Anterior tympanic artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0345">The anterior tympanic artery passes through the petrotympanic fissure to supply part of the lining of the middle ear and accompanies the chorda tympani nerve.</div></section><section><a id="s0270"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0230">Middle meningeal artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0350">The middle meningeal artery is the main source of blood to the calvaria (see <a href="../B9780702077050000380/B9780702077050000380.xhtml#f0115">Fig. 38.22</a>). It may arise either directly from the first part of the maxillary artery or from a common trunk with the inferior alveolar artery. When the maxillary artery lies superficial to lateral pterygoid, the middle meningeal artery is usually the first branch of the maxillary artery: this is not usually the case when the maxillary artery takes a deep course in relation to the muscle. The middle meningeal artery ascends between the sphenomandibular ligament and lateral pterygoid, passes between the two roots of the auriculotemporal nerve, and leaves the infratemporal fossa through the foramen spinosum to enter the cranial cavity medial to the midpoint of the zygomatic bone. It then runs in an anterolateral groove on the squamous part of the temporal bone, dividing into frontal and parietal branches (see <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0045">Fig. 25.10A</a>). The larger frontal (anterior) branch crosses the greater wing of the sphenoid and enters a groove or canal in the sphenoidal angle of the parietal bone (the sphenoparietal canal). It divides into branches between the dura mater and cranium; some branches ascend to the vertex. The parietal (posterior) branch curves back on the squamous temporal bone, reaches the lower border of the parietal bone anterior to its mastoid angle and divides to supply the posterior parts of the dura mater and cranium. These frontal and parietal branches anastomose with their fellows and with the anterior and posterior meningeal arteries.</div><div class="text" id="p0355">Ganglionic branches supply the trigeminal ganglion and associated roots. The petrosal branch enters the hiatus for the greater petrosal nerve, supplies the facial nerve, geniculate ganglion and tympanic cavity, and anastomoses with the stylomastoid artery (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib85" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_85">El Khouly et al 2008</a>). The superior tympanic artery runs in the canal for tensor tympani and supplies the muscle and the mucosa that lines the canal. Temporal branches traverse minute foramina in the greater wing of the sphenoid and anastomose with deep temporal arteries that supply temporalis. An anastomotic branch enters the orbit laterally in the superior orbital fissure, and anastomoses with a recurrent branch of the lacrimal artery; enlargement of this anastomosis is believed to account for the occasional origin of the lacrimal artery from the middle meningeal artery.</div></section><section><a id="s0275"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0235">Accessory meningeal artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0360">The accessory meningeal artery may arise from the maxillary artery or the middle meningeal artery. It enters the cranial cavity through the foramen ovale and supplies the trigeminal ganglion, dura mater and bone. Its main distribution is extracranial, principally to medial pterygoid, lateral pterygoid (upper head), tensor veli palatini, the greater wing and pterygoid processes of the sphenoid bone, the mandibular nerve and the otic ganglion. It is sometimes replaced by separate small arteries.</div></section><section><a id="s0280"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0240">Inferior alveolar artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0365">The inferior alveolar (dental) artery descends in the infratemporal fossa posterior to the inferior alveolar nerve. Here, it lies between the ramus of the mandible laterally and the sphenomandibular ligament medially. Before entering the mandibular foramen it gives off a mylohyoid branch, which pierces the sphenomandibular ligament to descend with the mylohyoid nerve in its groove on the inner surface of the ramus of the mandible. The mylohyoid artery ramifies superficially on the muscle and anastomoses with the submental branch of the facial artery. The inferior alveolar artery then traverses the mandibular canal with the inferior alveolar nerve to supply the mandibular molars and premolars, and divides into the incisive and mental arteries near the first premolar.</div><div class="text" id="p0370">The incisive artery continues below the incisor teeth (which it supplies) to the midline, where it anastomoses with its fellow, although few anastomotic vessels cross the midline. In the canal, the arteries supply the mandible, tooth sockets and teeth via branches that enter the minute hole at the apex of each root to supply the pulp. The mental artery emerges onto the face from the mandibular canal at the mental foramen, supplies muscles and skin in the chin region, and anastomoses with the inferior labial and submental arteries. Near its origin, the inferior alveolar artery has a lingual branch, which descends with the lingual nerve to supply the lingual mucous membrane. The pattern of branching of the inferior alveolar artery reflects that of the nerves of the same name.</div><section><a id="s0285"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0245">Arterial supply of periodontal ligaments</p><div class="textfl" id="p0375">The periodontal ligaments supporting the teeth are supplied by dental branches of the alveolar arteries. One branch enters the alveolus apically and sends two or three small rami into the dental pulp through the apical foramen, and other rami into the periodontal ligament. Interdental arteries ascend in the interdental septa, sending branches at right-angles into the periodontal ligament, and terminate by communicating with gingival vessels that also supply the cervical part of the ligament. The periodontal ligament therefore receives its blood from three sources: from the apical region; ascending interdental arteries; and descending vessels from the gingivae. These vessels anastomose with each other, which means that when the pulp of a tooth is removed during endodontic treatment, the attachment tissues of the tooth remain vital.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0290"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0250">Deep temporal arteries</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0380">The arterial supply to the temporalis in the coronal plane is concentrated mainly on its medial and lateral aspects. The anterior and posterior branches of the deep temporal arteries pass between temporalis and the pericranium, producing shallow grooves in the bone. They anastomose with the middle temporal branch of the superficial temporal artery situated laterally (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib54" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_54">Cheung 1996</a>). The anterior deep temporal artery anastomoses with the lacrimal artery by small branches that perforate the zygomatic bone and greater wing of the sphenoid.</div></section><section><a id="s0295"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0255">Masseteric artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0385">The masseteric artery is small and accompanies the masseteric nerve as it passes through the mandibular incisure (notch), posterior to the tendon of temporalis, to enter the deep surface of masseter (see <a href="../B9780702077050000380/B9780702077050000380.xhtml#f0105">Fig. 38.20</a>). Its branches can also supply the temporomandibular joint. The masseteric artery anastomoses with the masseteric branches of the facial artery and with the transverse facial branch of the superficial temporal artery. This vessel is at risk and may cause considerable bleeding if damaged when the sigmoid notch is entered or split surgically.</div></section><section><a id="s0300"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0260">Pterygoid arteries</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0390">The pterygoid arteries are irregular in number and origin, and are distributed to lateral and medial pterygoid.</div></section><section><a id="s0305"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0265">Buccal artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0395">The buccal artery emerges onto the face from the infratemporal fossa. It runs obliquely forwards between medial pterygoid and the attachment of temporalis, accompanying the lower part of the buccal branch of the mandibular nerve, to supply the skin and mucosa over buccinator (see <a href="../B9780702077050000380/B9780702077050000380.xhtml#f0110">Fig. 38.21A</a>). It anastomoses with branches of the facial and infraorbital arteries. A small lingual branch may be given off to accompany the lingual nerve and supply structures in the floor of the mouth.</div></section><section><a id="s0310"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0270">Posterior superior alveolar artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0400">The posterior superior alveolar artery usually arises from the maxillary artery within the pterygopalatine fossa and runs through the <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E63" id="pagebreak_1.464E63"></span><a id="pg1464.e61"/>pterygomaxillary fissure onto the maxillary tuberosity. It gives off branches that penetrate the bone here to supply the maxillary molar and premolar teeth and the maxillary air sinus, and other branches that supply the buccal mucosa. Occasionally the posterior superior alveolar artery arises from the infraorbital artery.</div></section><section><a id="s0315"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0275">Infraorbital artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0405">The infraorbital artery often arises with the posterior superior alveolar artery. It enters the orbit posteriorly through the inferior orbital fissure. Accompanying the infraorbital nerve, it passes along the infraorbital groove of the maxilla in the floor of the orbit before entering the infraorbital canal, and emerges onto the face through the infraorbital foramen. On the face the infraorbital artery supplies the lower eyelid, the lateral aspect of the nose and the upper lip.</div><div class="text" id="p0410">While in the infraorbital groove, it gives off branches that supply inferior rectus and inferior oblique, the nasolacrimal sac and, occasionally, the lacrimal gland.</div><div class="text" id="p0415">Within the infraorbital canal it gives off the anterior superior alveolar artery which curves through the canalis sinuosus to supply the upper incisor and canine teeth and the mucous membrane in the anterior part of the maxillary sinus. The canalis sinuosus swerves laterally from the infraorbital canal and inferomedially below it in the wall of the maxillary sinus, following the rim of the anterior nasal aperture, between the alveoli of canine and incisor teeth and the nasal cavity. It ends near the nasal septum where its terminal branch emerges. The canal may be up to 55<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm long.</div><div class="text" id="p0420">A middle superior alveolar artery is often described. When present, it branches from the infraorbital artery within the infraorbital canal and runs inferiorly along the lateral wall of the maxillary sinus towards the region of the canine and lateral incisor teeth, forming anastomotic arcades with the anterior and posterior superior alveolar arteries, and terminating near the canine tooth.</div><div class="text" id="p0425">The infraorbital artery has extensive anastomoses with the transverse facial and buccal arteries and with branches of the ophthalmic and facial arteries.</div></section><section><a id="s0320"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0280">Artery of the pterygoid canal</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0430">The artery of the pterygoid canal (Vidian artery) usually arises as a branch of the distal part of the maxillary artery or sometimes as a branch of the petrous segment of the internal carotid artery. It passes through the pterygoid canal and anastomoses with the pharyngeal, ethmoidal and sphenopalatine arteries in the pterygopalatine fossa and with the ascending pharyngeal, accessory meningeal, ascending palatine and descending palatine arteries in the oropharynx and around the pharyngotympanic tube. Through these complex anastomoses, the artery of the pterygoid canal contributes to the supply of part of the pharyngotympanic tube, the tympanic cavity and the upper part of the pharynx. It can also anastomose with the artery of the foramen rotundum and so communicate with branches of the cavernous portion of the internal carotid artery.</div><div class="text" id="p0435">The communication between the internal and external carotid arteries via the artery of the pterygoid canal is one of a number of collateral vascular pathways that exist between the external carotid artery and branches of the petrous and intracavernous segments of the internal carotid artery. Albeit small and difficult to demonstrate angiographically, these vascular connections may nevertheless provide the arterial supply for arteriovenous malformations, dural-based fistulae and skull base tumours, and may also compensate for occlusion of the internal carotid artery. They also pose a risk of inadvertent embolization of the brain parenchyma during interventional angiography of the external carotid artery system.</div><div class="text" id="p0440">There are extensive communications between the artery of the pterygoid canal and the highly vascular nasopharyngeal mucosa. Embolization of branches of the external carotid artery can result in incomplete obliteration of a vascular nasopharyngeal lesion when the artery of the pterygoid canal arises from the internal carotid artery. The collateral circulation provided by the artery of the pterygoid canal can help to maintain cerebral circulation if there is stenosis of the petrous internal carotid artery proximal to the point where the artery of the pterygoid canal joins it, because blood flow in the post-stenotic segment of the internal carotid artery will be supplemented from the external carotid artery via the artery of the pterygoid canal (see <a href="../B9780702077050000380/B9780702077050000380.xhtml#f0150">Fig. 38.29</a>) (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib5" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_5">Allen et al 2005</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib293" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_293">Takeuchi et al 2005</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib308" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_308">Tubbs et al 2007</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0325"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0285">Pharyngeal artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0445">The pharyngeal branch of the maxillary artery passes through the palatovaginal canal, accompanying the nerve of the same name, and is distributed to the mucosa of the nasal roof, nasopharynx, sphenoidal air sinus and pharyngotympanic tube.</div></section><section><a id="s0330"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0290">Greater (descending) palatine artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0450">The greater palatine artery leaves the pterygopalatine fossa through the greater (anterior) palatine canal, within which it gives off two or three lesser palatine arteries. The greater palatine artery supplies the inferior meatus of the nasal cavity, then passes onto the roof of the hard palate at the greater (anterior) palatine foramen and runs forwards to supply the hard palate and the palatal gingivae of the maxillary teeth. It gives off a branch that runs up into the incisive canal to anastomose with the nasopalatine artery and so contribute to the arterial supply of the nasal septum. The lesser palatine arteries emerge on to the palate through the lesser (posterior) palatine foramen, or foramina, and supply the soft palate.</div><div class="text" id="p0455">As the greater palatine artery runs the length of the hard palate, it permits axial mucoperiosteal flaps to be raised, if necessary bilaterally, for the reconstruction of local defects. It is also possible to pedicle the entire mucoperiosteum of the hard palate on a single greater palatine artery. The vascular supply to the denuded palatal bone is sufficient, presumably from its nasal surface, to permit regeneration of the palatal soft tissue. Contracture of the regenerated tissue does not occur because the defect lies over the palatal bone (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib104" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_104">Gullane and Arena 1977</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib105" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_105">Gullane and Arena 1985</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib265" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_265">Salins and Benjamin 2009</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0335"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0295">Sphenopalatine artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0460">The sphenopalatine artery and the greater palatine artery are the terminal branches of the maxillary artery. The sphenopalatine artery is the principal artery that supplies the mucosa of the nasal cavity. It passes through the sphenopalatine foramen posterior to the superior meatus. From here, its posterior lateral nasal branches ramify over the turbinates and meatuses and anastomose with the ethmoidal arteries and nasal branches of the greater palatine artery to supply the frontal, maxillary, ethmoidal and sphenoidal air sinuses. The sphenopalatine artery next crosses anteriorly on the inferior surface of the sphenoid and ends on the nasal septum in a series of posterior septal branches that anastomose with the ethmoidal arteries (see <a href="../B9780702077050000392/B9780702077050000392.xhtml#f0035">Fig. 39.9</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0465">Ligation of the sphenopalatine artery may be necessary in the control of refractory epistaxis. It is usually located endoscopically at the postero-inferior end of the middle turbinate. Multiple branches may be encountered. The sphenopalatine artery provides the axial blood supply to the nasal septal mucosal flap (nasoseptal flap) used in endoscopic skull-base repair, a reflection of its contribution to the vascular supply to the nasal cavity (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib111" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_111">Hadad et al 2006</a>).</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s0340"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0300">Internal carotid artery</h4><div class="textfl" id="p0470">The internal carotid artery supplies most of the ipsilateral cerebral hemisphere, eye and accessory organs, the forehead and, in part, the nose. From its origin at the carotid bifurcation, approximately at the level of T4 (see <a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0045">Figs 35.8</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000355/B9780702077050000355.xhtml#f0050">35.9</a>) where there is usually a carotid sinus, it ascends in front of the transverse processes of the upper three cervical vertebrae to the inferior aperture of the carotid canal in the petrous part of the temporal bone. Here, it enters the cranial cavity and turns anteriorly through the cavernous sinus in the carotid groove on the side of the body of the sphenoid bone. It terminates below the anterior perforated substance by division into the anterior and middle cerebral arteries.</div><div class="text" id="p0475">The internal carotid artery may be divided conveniently into cervical, petrous, cavernous and cerebral parts (see Video 26.1). Rarely, persistent embryonic branches to the basilar artery from the cervical part of the internal carotid artery may be encountered at the C1–C2 (persistent hypoglossal artery) and C2–C3 (pro-atlantal intersegmental artery) levels.</div><div class="text" id="p0480">Occlusive atherosclerotic disease within either the internal carotid or common carotid arteries may cause strokes or transient ischaemic attacks (TIAs) characterized by weakness of the contralateral side. Visual disturbances experienced in the ipsilateral eye and classically described as a ‘curtain’ falling down over the visual field (amaurosis fugax) may also occur.</div><section><a id="s9990"/><section><a id="s0345"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0305">Cervical part</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0485">The cervical part begins at the carotid bifurcation and ascends anterior to the transverse processes of the upper three cervical vertebrae and enters the cranial cavity via the carotid canal in the petrous part of the temporal bone. The artery has no branches in the neck and so is easily distinguishable from the external carotid artery, should the latter require ligation, e.g. to control haemorrhage from a penetrating injury to the neck (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib211a" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_211a">Nowinski et al 2015</a>).</div></section></section><section><a id="s0350"/><section><a id="s0355"/><section><a id="s0360"/><section><a id="s0365"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle0310">Relations</p><div class="textfl" id="p0490">The internal carotid artery is initially superficial in the carotid triangle, and then passes deeper, medial to the posterior belly <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E64" id="pagebreak_1.464E64"></span><a id="pg1464.e62"/>of digastric. Except near the skull, the internal jugular vein and vagus nerve are lateral to it within the carotid sheath. The external carotid artery is first anteromedial, but then curves back to lie superficial. Posteriorly, the internal carotid adjoins longus capitis, and the superior cervical sympathetic ganglion lies between them. The superior laryngeal nerve crosses obliquely behind it. The pharyngeal wall lies medial to the artery, which is separated by fat and pharyngeal veins from the ascending pharyngeal artery and superior laryngeal nerve. Anterolaterally, the internal carotid artery is covered by sternocleidomastoid. Below the posterior belly of digastric, the hypoglossal nerve and superior root of the ansa cervicalis and the lingual and facial veins are superficial to the artery. At the level of the digastric, the internal carotid is crossed by stylohyoid and the occipital and posterior auricular arteries. Above the digastric, it is separated from the external carotid artery by the styloid process, styloglossus and stylopharyngeus, the glossopharyngeal nerve and the pharyngeal branch of the vagus, and the deeper part of the parotid gland. At the base of the skull, the glossopharyngeal, vagus, accessory and hypoglossal nerves lie between the internal carotid artery and the internal jugular vein, which here has become posterior. The length of the artery varies with the length of the neck and the point of the carotid bifurcation. It may arise from the aortic arch, in which case it lies medial to the external carotid as far as the larynx, where it crosses behind it. The cervical portion is normally straight but may be very tortuous, when it lies closer to the pharynx than usual, very near the tonsil. In children, the tonsillocarotid distance increases with growth to a maximum value of 25<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib70" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_70">Deutsch et al 1995</a>). The internal carotid artery enters the cranium without giving off any branches. It may occasionally be absent.</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s9370"/><section><a id="s0370"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0315">Petrous part</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0495">The petrous part of the internal carotid artery ascends in the carotid canal, curves anteromedially and then superomedially above the cartilage that fills the foramen lacerum, and enters the cranial cavity. It lies at first anterior to the cochlea and tympanic cavity, and is separated from the latter and the pharyngotympanic tube by a thin, bony lamella that is cribriform in the young and partly absorbed in old age. Further anteriorly, it is separated from the trigeminal ganglion by the thin roof of the carotid canal, although this is often deficient. The artery is surrounded by a venous plexus and by the carotid autonomic plexus, derived from the internal carotid branch of the superior cervical ganglion. The petrous part of the artery gives rise to two branches. The caroticotympanic artery is a small, occasionally double, vessel that enters the tympanic cavity by a foramen in the carotid canal and anastomoses with the anterior tympanic branch of the maxillary artery and the stylomastoid artery. The pterygoid artery is inconsistent; when present, it enters the pterygoid canal with the nerve of the same name, and anastomoses with a (recurrent) branch of the greater palatine artery.</div></section><section><a id="s0375"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0320">Cavernous part</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0500">The cavernous part of the internal carotid artery ascends to the posterior clinoid process. It turns anteriorly to the side of the body of the sphenoid within the cavernous sinus and then curves superiorly and medial to the anterior clinoid process, to emerge through the dural roof of the sinus. The oculomotor, trochlear, ophthalmic and abducens nerves are lateral to it within the cavernous sinus. The abducens nerve is closely related to the lateral wall of the internal carotid artery, whilst the oculomotor and trochlear nerves are situated in the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0035">Figs 25.8</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0040">25.9</a>). This explains the higher risk of abducens nerve injury secondary to pathology such as aneurysms of the cavernous part of the carotid artery. Occasionally the caroticoclinoid ligament between the anterior and middle clinoid processes becomes ossified, forming a bony ring (caroticoclinoid foramen) around the artery (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib247" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_247">Ray and Gupta 2006</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0505">The cavernous part of the artery gives off a number of small vessels. Branches supply the trigeminal ganglion, the walls of the cavernous and inferior petrosal sinuses, and the nerves contained therein. A minute meningeal branch passes over the lesser wing of the sphenoid to supply the dura mater and bone in the anterior cranial fossa, and also anastomoses with a meningeal branch of the posterior ethmoidal artery. Numerous small hypophysial branches supply the neurohypophysis, and are of particular importance because they form the pituitary portal system (see <a href="../B9780702077050000239/B9780702077050000239.xhtml#f0055">Fig. 23.11</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0380"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0325">Intracranial part</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0510">After piercing the dura mater, the internal carotid artery turns back below the optic nerve to run between it and the oculomotor nerve. It reaches the anterior perforated substance at the medial end of the lateral fissure and terminates by dividing into the anterior and middle cerebral arteries (see <a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0020">Fig. 26.3</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0515">Several preterminal vessels leave the cerebral portion of the internal carotid. The ophthalmic artery arises from the anterior part of the internal carotid as it leaves the cavernous sinus, often at the point of piercing the dura, and enters the orbit through the optic canal. The posterior communicating artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0020">Fig. 26.3</a>) runs back from the internal carotid above the oculomotor nerve, and anastomoses with the posterior cerebral artery (a terminal branch of the basilar artery), thereby contributing to the circulus arteriosus around the interpeduncular fossa. The posterior communicating artery is usually very small. However, sometimes it is so large that the posterior cerebral artery is supplied via the posterior communicating artery rather than from the basilar artery (‘fetal posterior communicating artery’); it is often larger on one side only. Small branches from its posterior half pierce the posterior perforated substance together with branches from the posterior cerebral artery. Collectively they supply the medial thalamic surface and the walls of the third ventricle. The anterior choroidal artery leaves the internal carotid just distal to its posterior communicating branch and passes back above the medial part of the uncus. It crosses the optic tract to reach and supply the crus cerebri of the midbrain, then turns laterally, recrosses the optic tract, and gains the lateral side of the lateral geniculate body, which it supplies with several branches. It finally enters the inferior horn of the lateral ventricle via the choroidal fissure and ends in the choroid plexus. This small, but important, vessel also contributes to the blood supply of the globus pallidus, caudate nucleus, amygdala, hypothalamus, tuber cinereum, red nucleus, substantia nigra, posterior limb of the internal capsule, optic radiation, optic tract, hippocampus and the fimbria of the fornix.</div><div class="text" id="p0520">The combination of the petrous, cavernous and intracranial parts of the internal carotid artery is called the ‘carotid siphon’ because of its sigmoid course (see <a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0010">Fig. 26.1</a> and Video 26.1). However, in infants, the parasellar region of the internal carotid artery does not form a siphon but takes a relatively straight course (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib323" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_323">Weninger and Muller 1999</a>). The cranial and sympathetic nerves therefore have different topographical relationships with the artery in the infant compared with that found in older children and adults.</div><div class="text" id="p0525">The initial millimetres of the intracranial part lie between two rings (proximal and distal rings) of dense connective tissue that surround the carotid artery where the ophthalmic artery usually branches. In cases of surgical clipping of ophthalmic artery aneurysms, it is of surgical relevance for neurosurgeons to expose this part of the artery by removing the anterior clinoid process and exposing this segment of the internal carotid artery (see Video 26.1).</div></section></section><section><a id="s0385"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0330">Ophthalmic artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0530">The ophthalmic artery leaves the internal carotid artery as it exits the cavernous sinus medial to the anterior clinoid process. It enters the orbit by the optic canal, inferolateral to the optic nerve and continues forwards for a short distance before turning medially by crossing (almost always) over or under the optic nerve (see <a href="../B9780702077050000446/B9780702077050000446.xhtml#f0085">Fig. 44.13A</a>). The main trunk of the artery continues along the medial wall of the orbit between the superior oblique and lateral rectus, and divides into supratrochlear (frontal) and dorsal nasal branches at the medial end of the upper eyelid. Although the order of branches from the ophthalmic artery is quite variable, there are several consistent branches, including the central retinal artery, muscular branches, ciliary arteries, lacrimal artery, supraorbital artery, anterior and posterior ethmoidal arteries, meningeal branch, medial palpebral arteries, supratrochlear artery and dorsal nasal artery (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib117" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_117">Hayreh and Dass 1962a</a>). Many of the branches of the ophthalmic artery accompany sensory nerves with the same name and have a similar distribution to these nerves. Variations in the origin and course of the ophthalmic artery have been described (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib125" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_125">Huynh-Le et al 2005</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib116" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_116">Hayreh 2006</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib27" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_27">Bertelli et al 2017</a>).</div><section><a id="s8390"/><section><a id="s0390"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0335">Central retinal artery</p><div class="textfl" id="p0535">The small central artery of the retina is the first branch of the ophthalmic artery. It begins below the optic nerve and, for a short distance, lies in the dural sheath of the nerve. It enters the inferomedial surface of the nerve 6.4–15.2<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm behind the eyeball, and runs to the retina (accompanying the central retinal vein) along its axis (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib148" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_148">Kocabiyik et al 2005</a>). It travels within the optic nerve to its head, where it passes through the lamina cribrosa. At this level, the ophthalmic artery divides into equal superior and inferior branches, each of which, after a few millimetres, give off nasal and temporal branches that supply the ‘quadrants’ of the retina (see <a href="../B9780702077050000458/B9780702077050000458.xhtml#f0145">Fig. 45.27</a>). Although similar retinal veins unite to form the central retinal vein, the courses of the arteries and veins do not correspond exactly. These vessels mainly run within the nerve fibre and ganglion cell layers of the retina, a course that accounts for their clarity when seen through an ophthalmoscope (see <a href="../B9780702077050000458/B9780702077050000458.xhtml#f0110">Fig. 45.20A</a>), and explains why they can serve as an easily accessible indicator of cardiovascular disease. Arteries often cross veins, usually lying superficial to <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E65" id="pagebreak_1.464E65"></span><a id="pg1464.e63"/>them; in severe hypertension, the arteries may press on the veins and cause visible dilations distal to these crossings. The vitreal location of arteries, their lighter, bright red coloration and smaller diameter in comparison to veins allow the two vessel types to be distinguished ophthalmoscopically. The detailed pattern of the inner retinal vessels is unique and therefore can be used as a source of biometric information for individual recognition.</div><div class="text" id="p0540">From the four major arteries within the inner retina, dichotomous branches run from the posterior pole to the periphery, supplying the whole retina (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib334" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_334">Zhang 1994</a>). Arteries and veins ramify in the nerve fibre layer, near the internal limiting membrane, and arterioles pass deeper into the retina to supply capillary beds. Venules return from these beds to larger superficial veins that converge towards the disc to form the central retinal vein.</div><div class="text" id="p0545">Retinal capillary networks are often in three different layers, the number of layers depending on location. Radial peripapillary capillaries are the most superficial of the capillary networks and lie within the inner nerve fibre layer. A layer of inner capillaries runs within the nerve fibre and ganglion cell layers, and an outer capillary layer is located in the inner plexiform and inner nuclear layers (see <a href="../B9780702077050000458/B9780702077050000458.xhtml#f0155">Fig. 45.29</a>). Approaching the fovea, capillaries are restricted to two layers, and terminal capillaries eventually join to form a single-layered macular capillary ring, producing a capillary-free zone 450–500<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>μm in diameter at the fovea. This avascular region is clearly visible in a fluorescein angiogram (see <a href="../B9780702077050000458/B9780702077050000458.xhtml#f0110">Fig. 45.20B</a>). Capillaries become less numerous in the peripheral retina and are absent from a zone approximately 1.5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm wide adjoining the ora serrata.</div><div class="text" id="p0550">The territories of the arteries that supply a particular quadrant do not overlap, nor do the branches within a quadrant anastomose with each other, which means that a blockage in a retinal artery causes loss of vision in the corresponding part of the visual field. The only exception to this end-arterial pattern is in the vicinity of the optic disc. Here, the posterior ciliary arteries enter the eye near the disc and their rami not only supply the adjacent choroid, but also form an anastomotic circle in the sclera around the head of the optic nerve (circle of Zinn/Haller) (see <a href="../B9780702077050000458/B9780702077050000458.xhtml#f0160">Fig. 45.30</a>). Branches from this ring join the pial arteries of the nerve (see below). Small cilioretinal arteries derived from any arteries in this region may enter the eye in up to 50% of individuals and contribute to the central retinal vasculature; they may possibly preserve visual function following occlusion of the central retinal artery. Small retinociliary veins may sometimes be present.</div><div class="text" id="p0555">The structure of retinal blood vessels resembles that of vessels elsewhere, except that the arteries lack an internal elastic lamina, and their adventitia may contain muscle cells. Capillaries are non-fenestrated; endothelial cells are joined by complex tight junctions, fulfilling the requirements of a blood–retinal barrier. Perivascular cells, including pericytes and glia, play key roles in the development and maintenance of the blood–retinal barrier (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib28" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_28">Bharadwaj et al 2013</a>). Selective loss of pericytes happens early in the development of diabetic retinopathy and has been linked to the characteristic pathological changes seen in this condition (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib232" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_232">Park et al 2017</a>). Within the optic nerve, the central artery is innervated by sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves; this innervation does not extend to the retinal vessels. The cholinergic parasympathetic supply is derived mainly from the pterygopalatine ganglion and is vasodilatory. The adrenergic postganglionic sympathetic supply originates in the superior cervical ganglion and travels via a plexus around the internal carotid and ophthalmic arteries; it is unclear whether it elicits vasoconstriction or dilation (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib21" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_21">Bergua et al 2013</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0560">Although inner retinal blood vessels lie between the incoming light and the photoreceptors, they are not perceived because their location is constant. In marked contrast, the growth of new retinal vessels (neovascularization) is one of the major sight-threatening complications of diseases such as diabetes and retinopathy of prematurity.</div></section><section><a id="s0395"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0340">Muscular arteries</p><div class="textfl" id="p0565">Branches to the extraocular muscles frequently spring from a common trunk to form superior and inferior groups, most of which accompany branches of the oculomotor nerve. The inferior branch contains most of the anterior ciliary arteries. Other muscular vessels branch from the lacrimal and supraorbital arteries or from the trunk of the ophthalmic artery.</div></section><section><a id="s0400"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0345">Ciliary arteries</p><div class="textfl" id="p0570">The ciliary arteries are distributed in long and short posterior, and in anterior groups (see <a href="../B9780702077050000446/B9780702077050000446.xhtml#f0085">Fig. 44.13A</a>). Long posterior ciliary arteries, usually two, pierce the sclera near the optic nerve, pass anteriorly along the horizontal meridian and join the major arterial circle of the iris (see <a href="../B9780702077050000458/B9780702077050000458.xhtml#f0045">Fig. 45.8</a>). About seven short posterior ciliary arteries pass close to the optic nerve to reach the eyeball, where they divide into 15–20 branches. They pierce the sclera around the optic nerve to supply the choroid, and anastomose with twigs of the central retinal artery at the optic disc (see <a href="../B9780702077050000458/B9780702077050000458.xhtml#f0160">Fig. 45.30</a>). Anterior ciliary arteries arise from muscular branches of the ophthalmic artery. They reach the eyeball on the tendons of the recti, form a circumcorneal subconjunctival vascular zone, and pierce the sclera near the sclerocorneal junction to end in the major arterial circle of the iris.</div></section><section><a id="s0405"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0350">Lacrimal artery</p><div class="textfl" id="p0575">The lacrimal artery is a large branch that usually leaves the ophthalmic artery near its exit from the optic canal (see <a href="../B9780702077050000446/B9780702077050000446.xhtml#f0085">Fig. 44.13A</a>), although it occasionally arises before the ophthalmic artery enters the orbit. It accompanies the lacrimal nerve along the upper border of lateral rectus, supplies and traverses the lacrimal gland, and ends in the eyelids and conjunctiva as the lateral palpebral arteries. The latter run medially in the upper and lower lids and anastomose with the medial palpebral arteries. The lacrimal artery gives off one or two zygomatic branches. The zygomaticofacial artery passes through the lateral wall of the orbit to emerge onto the face at the zygomaticofacial foramen, supplies the region overlying the prominence of the cheek foramen and anastomoses with transverse facial and zygomatico-orbital branches of the facial artery. The zygomaticotemporal artery also passes through the lateral wall of the orbit, via the zygomaticotemporal foramen, supplies the skin over the non-beard part of the temple and anastomoses with the deep temporal branches of the maxillary artery. A recurrent meningeal branch, usually small, passes back via the lateral part of the superior orbital fissure to anastomose with the middle meningeal artery. This branch is sometimes large and replaces the lacrimal artery, in which case it becomes a more significant contributor to the orbital blood supply (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib118" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_118">Hayreh and Dass 1962b</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib313" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_313">Uchino et al 2013</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0410"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0355">Supraorbital artery</p><div class="textfl" id="p0580">The supraorbital artery leaves the ophthalmic artery where it crosses the optic nerve (see <a href="../B9780702077050000446/B9780702077050000446.xhtml#f0085">Fig. 44.13A</a>), and ascends medial to superior rectus and levator palpebrae superioris. It accompanies the supraorbital nerve between the periosteum and levator palpebrae superioris, passes through the supraorbital foramen or notch, and divides into superficial and deep branches. These supply the skin, muscles and frontal periosteum, and anastomose with the supratrochlear artery and with the frontal branch of the superficial temporal artery and its contralateral fellow (see <a href="../B9780702077050000367/B9780702077050000367.xhtml#f0105">Fig. 36.20</a>). The supraorbital artery supplies superior rectus and levator palpebrae superioris, sends a branch across the trochlea to the medial canthus, and often sends a branch to the diploë of the frontal bone at the supraorbital margin; it may also supply the mucoperiosteum in the frontal sinus.</div></section><section><a id="s0415"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0360">Anterior ethmoidal artery</p><div class="textfl" id="p0585">The anterior ethmoidal artery passes with its accompanying nerve through the anterior ethmoidal canal to supply the ethmoidal and frontal air sinuses. Entering the cranium, it gives off a meningeal branch to the dura mater, and nasal branches that descend into the nasal cavity with the anterior ethmoidal nerve (see <a href="../B9780702077050000392/B9780702077050000392.xhtml#f0035">Fig. 39.9</a>). It runs in a groove on the deep surface of the nasal bone to supply the lateral nasal wall and septum. A terminal branch emerges at the junction of the nasal bone and the lateral nasal cartilage and supplies the skin covering the external nose.</div></section><section><a id="s0420"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0365">Posterior ethmoidal artery</p><div class="textfl" id="p0590">The posterior ethmoidal artery runs through the posterior ethmoidal canal and supplies the posterior ethmoidal air sinuses. Entering the cranium, it gives off a meningeal branch to the dura mater, and nasal branches that descend into the nasal cavity via the cribriform plate and anastomose with branches of the sphenopalatine artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000392/B9780702077050000392.xhtml#f0035">Fig. 39.9</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0425"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0370">Meningeal branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p0595">A meningeal branch, usually small, passes back through the superior orbital fissure or its own foramen to the middle cranial fossa, where it anastomoses with the middle meningeal artery. It is sometimes large, in which case it becomes a major contributor to the orbital blood supply.</div></section><section><a id="s0430"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0375">Medial palpebral arteries</p><div class="textfl" id="p0600">Superior and inferior medial palpebral arteries arise from the ophthalmic artery below the trochlea. They descend behind the nasolacrimal sac to enter the eyelids, where each divides into two branches that course laterally along the edges of the tarsal plates, forming the superior and inferior arches and supplying the eyelids. They anastomose with branches of the supraorbital, zygomatico-orbital and lacrimal arteries. The inferior arch also anastomoses with the facial artery.</div></section><section><a id="s0435"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0380">Supratrochlear artery</p><div class="textfl" id="p0605">The supratrochlear artery is a terminal branch of the ophthalmic artery. It emerges onto the face from the orbit superomedially with the <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E66" id="pagebreak_1.464E66"></span><a id="pg1464.e64"/>supratrochlear nerve at the frontal notch and ascends on the forehead to supply the medial parts of the upper eyelid, forehead and scalp, muscles and pericranium. It anastomoses with the supraorbital artery and with its contralateral fellow.</div></section><section><a id="s0440"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0385">Dorsal nasal artery</p><div class="textfl" id="p0610">The dorsal nasal artery is the other terminal branch of the ophthalmic artery and emerges from the orbit between the trochlea and medial palpebral ligament. It gives a branch to the upper part of the nasolacrimal sac and then divides into two branches. One branch anastomoses with the terminal part of the facial artery, and the other runs along the dorsum of the nose, supplies its outer surface and anastomoses with its contralateral fellow and the lateral nasal branch of the facial artery.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s0445"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0390">Anterior cerebral artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0615">The anterior cerebral artery is the smaller of the two terminal branches of the internal carotid artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0010">Fig. 26.1</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0620">Surgical nomenclature divides the vessel into three parts: A1, from the termination of the internal carotid artery to the junction with the anterior communicating artery; A2, from the junction with the anterior communicating artery to the origin of the callosomarginal artery; and A3, distal to the origin of the callosomarginal artery, this segment is also known as the pericallosal artery.</div><div class="text" id="p0625">The anterior cerebral artery starts at the medial end of the stem of the lateral fissure. It passes anteromedially above the optic nerve to the great longitudinal fissure where it connects with its contralateral fellow by a short transverse anterior communicating artery. The anterior communicating artery is about 4<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm in length and may be double. It gives off numerous anteromedial central branches that supply the optic chiasma, lamina terminalis, hypothalamus, para-olfactory areas, anterior columns of the fornix and the cingulate gyrus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0015">Fig. 26.2C</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0630">The two anterior cerebral arteries travel together in the great longitudinal fissure. They pass around the curve of the genu of the corpus callosum and then along its upper surface to its posterior end, where they anastomose with posterior cerebral arteries. They give off cortical and central branches.</div><div class="text" id="p0635">The cortical branches of the anterior cerebral artery are named according to their distribution. Two or three orbital branches ramify on the orbital surface of the frontal lobe and supply the olfactory cortex, gyrus rectus and medial orbital gyrus. Frontal branches supply the corpus callosum, cingulate gyrus, medial frontal gyrus and paracentral lobule. Parietal branches supply the precuneus, while the frontal and parietal branches both send twigs over the superomedial border of the hemisphere to supply a strip of territory on the superolateral surface (see <a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0015">Fig. 26.2B</a>). Cortical branches of the anterior cerebral artery, therefore, supply the areas of the motor and somatosensory cortices that represent the lower limb.</div><div class="text" id="p0640">Central branches of the anterior cerebral artery arise from its proximal portion and enter the anterior perforated substance (see <a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0020">Fig. 26.3</a>) and lamina terminalis. Collectively, they supply the rostrum of the corpus callosum, the septum pellucidum, the anterior part of the putamen, the head of the caudate nucleus and adjacent parts of the internal capsule. Immediately proximal or distal to its junction with the anterior communicating artery, the anterior cerebral artery gives rise to the medial striate artery, which supplies the anterior part of the head of the caudate nucleus and adjacent regions of the putamen and internal capsule.</div></section><section><a id="s0450"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0395">Middle cerebral artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0645">The middle cerebral artery is the larger terminal branch of the internal carotid artery. Surgical nomenclature divides the vessel into four parts: M1, from the termination of the internal carotid artery to the bi-/trifurcation, this segment also being known as the sphenoidal; M2, the segment running in the lateral (Sylvian) fissure, also known as the insular; M3, coming out of the lateral fissure, also known as the opercular; and M4, cortical portions.</div><div class="text" id="p0650">The middle cerebral artery runs at first in the lateral fissure, then posterosuperiorly on the insula, and divides into branches distributed to the insula and the adjacent lateral cerebral surface (see <a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0015">Figs 26.2</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0025">26.4</a>). Like the anterior cerebral artery, it has cortical and central branches.</div><div class="text" id="p0655">Cortical branches send orbital vessels to the inferior frontal gyrus and the lateral orbital surface of the frontal lobe. Frontal branches supply the precentral, middle and inferior frontal gyri. Two parietal branches are distributed to the postcentral gyrus, the lower part of the superior parietal lobule and the whole inferior parietal lobule. Two or three temporal branches supply the lateral surface of the temporal lobe. Cortical branches of the middle cerebral artery therefore supply the motor and somatosensory cortices that represent the whole of the body (other than the lower limb), the auditory area and the insula.</div><div class="text" id="p0660">Small central branches of the middle cerebral artery, the lateral striate or lenticulostriate arteries, arise at its origin and enter the anterior perforated substance together with the medial striate artery. Lateral striate arteries ascend in the external capsule over the lower lateral aspect of the lentiform complex, then turn medially, traverse the lentiform complex and the internal capsule and extend as far as the caudate nucleus.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0455"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0400">Circulus arteriosus cerebri</h4><div class="textfl" id="p0665">The circulus arteriosus cerebri (cerebral arterial circle, circle of Willis) is a large arterial anastomosis that unites the internal carotid and vertebrobasilar systems (see <a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0020">Fig. 26.3</a>). It lies in the subarachnoid space within the basal cisterns that surround the optic chiasma and infundibulum. The anterior cerebral arteries are derived from the internal carotid arteries and are linked by a small, but functionally important, anterior communicating artery. Posteriorly, the two posterior cerebral arteries, formed by the division of the basilar artery, are joined to the ipsilateral internal carotid artery by a posterior communicating artery.</div><div class="text" id="p0670">There is considerable individual variation in the pattern and calibre of vessels that make up the circulus arteriosus (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib243" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_243">Puchades-Orts et al 1976</a>). Although a complete circular channel almost always exists, one vessel is usually sufficiently narrowed to reduce its role as a collateral route and the circle is rarely functionally complete. Cerebral and communicating arteries individually may all be absent, variably hypoplastic, double or even triple. The haemodynamics of the circle are influenced by variations in the calibre of communicating arteries and in the segments of the anterior and posterior cerebral arteries that lie between their origins and their junctions with the corresponding communicating arteries. The greatest variation in calibre between individuals occurs in the posterior communicating artery, which is normally very small, so that only limited flow is possible between the anterior and posterior circulations. Commonly, the diameter of the pre-communicating part of the posterior cerebral artery is larger than that of the posterior communicating artery, in which case the blood supply to the occipital lobes is mainly from the vertebrobasilar system. However, sometimes the diameter of the pre-communicating part of the posterior cerebral artery is smaller than that of the posterior communicating artery, in which case the blood supply to the occipital lobes is mainly from the internal carotids via the posterior communicating arteries. Since the primary purpose of the vascular circle is to provide anastomotic channels if one vessel is occluded, it is important to note that a normal-sized posterior communicating artery cannot usually fulfil this role. Agenesis or hypoplasia of the initial segment of the anterior cerebral artery is more frequent than anomalies in the anterior communicating artery and contribute to defective circulation in about one-third of individuals.</div><section><a id="s0460"/><section><a id="s0465"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0405">Central or perforating arteries</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0675">Numerous small central (perforating or ganglionic) arteries arise from the circulus arteriosus or from vessels near it (see <a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0020">Fig. 26.3</a>). Many of these enter the brain through the anterior and posterior perforated substances. Central branches supply nearby structures on or near the base of the brain together with the interior of the cerebral hemisphere, including the internal capsule, basal ganglia and thalamus. These branches form four principal groups. The anteromedial group arises from the anterior cerebral and anterior communicating arteries, and passes through the medial part of the anterior perforated substance. These arteries supply the optic chiasma, lamina terminalis, anterior, preoptic and supraoptic areas of the hypothalamus, septum, para-olfactory areas, anterior columns of the fornix, cingulate gyrus, rostrum of the corpus callosum and the anterior part of the putamen and the head of the caudate nucleus. The posteromedial group comes from the entire length of the posterior communicating artery and from the proximal portion of the posterior cerebral artery. Anteriorly, these arteries supply the hypothalamus and pituitary gland, and the anterior and medial parts of the thalamus via thalamo-perforating arteries. Caudally, branches of the posteromedial group supply the mammillary bodies, subthalamus, the lateral wall of the third ventricle, including the medial thalamus, and the globus pallidus. The anterolateral group is mostly comprised of branches from the proximal part of the middle cerebral artery that are also known as striate, lateral striate or lenticulostriate arteries. They enter the brain through the anterior perforated substance and supply the posterior striatum, lateral globus pallidus and the anterior limb, genu and posterior limb of the internal capsule. The medial striate artery, derived from the middle or anterior cerebral arteries, supplies the rostral part of the caudate nucleus and putamen, and the anterior limb and genu of the internal capsule. The posterolateral group is derived from the posterior cerebral artery distal to its junction with the posterior communicating artery, and supplies the cerebral peduncle, colliculi, pineal gland and, via thalamogeniculate branches, the posterior thalamus and medial geniculate body.<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E67" id="pagebreak_1.464E67"></span><a id="pg1464.e65"/></div></section></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s0470"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle0410">Arterial Supply of the Brain and Meninges</h2><section><a id="s0475"/><section><a id="s0480"/><section><a id="s0485"/><h3 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0415">Meningeal arteries</h3><div class="textfl" id="p0680">Despite their names, the cranial meningeal arteries are predominantly periosteal (see <a href="../B9780702077050000252/B9780702077050000252.xhtml#f0045">Fig. 25.10A</a>). Their main targets are bone and haemopoietic marrow, and only some arterial branches are distributed to the cranial dura mater <span class="italic">per se</span>.</div><div class="text" id="p0685">The branches of the meningeal vessels lie mainly in the endosteal layer of dura. In the anterior cranial fossa, the dura is supplied by the anterior meningeal branches of the anterior and posterior ethmoidal and internal carotid arteries and a branch of the middle meningeal artery. In the middle cranial fossa, the dura is supplied by the middle and accessory meningeal branches of the maxillary artery; a branch of the ascending pharyngeal artery (entering via the foramen lacerum); branches of the internal carotid artery; and a recurrent branch of the lacrimal artery. In the posterior fossa, the dura is supplied by meningeal branches of the occipital artery which enter the skull by the jugular and mastoid foramina; the posterior meningeal branches of the vertebral artery; occasional small branches of the ascending pharyngeal artery which enter the skull by the jugular foramen and hypoglossal canal; and dorsal meningeal and tentorial branches from the meningohypophysial trunk. The anatomy of the meningeal arteries explains the vascular supply of tumours arising from the meninges (meningiomas) and the architecture of dural arteriovenous fistulae and malformations. (For detailed information on the surgical anatomy of the meningeal arteries, see <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib157" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_157">Lasjaunias et al (2001)</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib179" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_179">Martins et al (2005)</a>.)</div></section><section><a id="s0490"/><h4 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0420">Brainstem</h4><div class="textfl" id="p0690">The medulla oblongata is supplied by branches of the vertebral, anterior and posterior spinal, posterior inferior cerebellar and basilar arteries, entering along the ventral median fissure and the dorsal median sulcus. Vessels that supply the central substance enter along the rootlets of the glossopharyngeal, vagus and hypoglossal nerves. There is an additional supply via a pial plexus from the same main arteries. The choroid plexus of the fourth ventricle is supplied by the posterior inferior cerebellar arteries. The pons is supplied by the basilar artery and the anterior inferior and superior cerebellar arteries. Direct branches from the basilar artery enter the pons along the basilar sulcus. Other vessels enter along the trigeminal, abducens, facial and vestibulocochlear nerves and from the pial plexus. The midbrain is supplied by the posterior cerebral, superior cerebellar and basilar arteries. The crura cerebri are supplied by vessels entering on their medial and lateral sides. The medial vessels enter the medial side of the crus and also supply the superomedial part of the tegmentum, including the oculomotor nucleus. Lateral vessels supply the lateral part of the crus and the tegmentum. The colliculi are supplied by three vessels on each side from the posterior cerebral and superior cerebellar arteries. An additional supply to the crura, and the colliculi and their peduncles, comes from the posterolateral group of central branches of the posterior cerebral artery.</div></section><section><a id="s0495"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0425">Cerebellum</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0695">The cerebellum is supplied by the posterior inferior, anterior inferior and superior cerebellar arteries. The cerebellar arteries form superficial anastomoses on the cortical surface. Anastomoses between deeper, subcortical, branches have been postulated (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib83" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_83">Duvernoy et al 1983</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0500"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0430">Optic chiasma, tract and radiation</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0700">The blood supply to the optic chiasma, tract and radiation is of considerable clinical importance. The chiasma is supplied in part by the anterior cerebral arteries but its median zone depends upon rami from the internal carotid arteries reaching it via the stalk of the hypophysis. The anterior choroidal and posterior communicating arteries supply the optic tract, and the optic radiation receives blood through deep branches of the middle and posterior cerebral arteries.</div></section><section><a id="s0505"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0435">Diencephalon</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0705">The thalamus is supplied chiefly by branches of the posterior communicating, posterior cerebral and basilar arteries (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib239" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_239">Plets et al 1970</a>). A contribution from the anterior choroidal artery is often noted but this has been disputed. The medial branch of the posterior choroidal artery supplies the posterior commissure, habenular region, pineal gland and medial parts of the thalamus, including the pulvinar. Small central branches, which arise from the circulus arteriosus and its associated vessels, supply the hypothalamus. The pituitary gland is supplied by hypophysial arteries derived from the internal carotid artery, and the anterior cerebral and anterior communicating arteries supply the lamina terminalis.</div><div class="text" id="p0710">The choroid plexuses of the third and lateral ventricles are supplied by branches of the internal carotid and posterior cerebral arteries.</div></section><section><a id="s0510"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0440">Basal ganglia</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0715">The majority of the arterial supply to the basal ganglia comes from the striate arteries, which are branches from the roots of the anterior and middle cerebral arteries. They enter the brain through the anterior perforated substance and also supply the internal capsule. The caudate nucleus receives blood additionally from the anterior and posterior choroidal arteries. The posteroinferior part of the lentiform complex is supplied by the thalamostriate branches of the posterior cerebral artery. The anterior choroidal artery, a preterminal branch of the internal carotid artery, contributes to the blood supply of both segments of the globus pallidus and the caudate nucleus. Famously, the ligation of this vessel during a neurosurgical procedure on a patient suffering from Parkinson’s disease led to alleviation of the parkinsonian symptoms, presumably as a consequence of infarction of the globus pallidus. This chance observation led to the initiation of pallidal surgery (pallidotomy) for this condition.</div></section><section><a id="s0515"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0445">Internal capsule</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0720">The internal capsule is supplied by central, or perforating, arteries that arise from the circulus arteriosus and its associated vessels. These include the lateral and medial striate arteries that come from the middle and anterior cerebral arteries and also supply the basal ganglia. The lateral striate arteries supply the anterior limb, genu and much of the posterior limb of the internal capsule and are commonly involved in ischaemic and haemorrhagic stroke. One of the larger striate branches of the middle cerebral artery is anachronistically known as ‘Charcot’s artery of cerebral haemorrhage’. The medial striate artery, a branch of the proximal part of either the middle or anterior cerebral artery, supplies the anterior limb and genu of the internal capsule and the basal ganglia. The anterior choroidal artery also contributes to the supply of the ventral part of the posterior limb and the retrolenticular part of the internal capsule.</div></section><section><a id="s0520"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0450">Cerebral cortex</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0725">The entire blood supply of the cerebral cortex comes from cortical branches of the anterior, middle and posterior cerebral arteries (see <a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0010">Figs 26.1</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0015">26.2</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0025">Figs 26.4</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000264/B9780702077050000264.xhtml#f0030">26.5</a>, Video 26.1; <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib84" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_84">Duvernoy et al 1981</a>). In general, long branches traverse the cortex and penetrate the subjacent white matter for 3 or 4<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm without communicating. Short branches are confined to the cerebral cortex and form a compact network in the middle zone of the grey matter, whereas the outer and inner zones are sparingly supplied. Although adjacent vessels anastomose on the surface of the brain, they become end arteries as soon as they enter it. In general, superficial anastomoses only occur between microscopic branches of the cerebral arteries, and there is little evidence that they can provide an effective alternative circulation after the occlusion of larger vessels.</div><div class="text" id="p0730">The lateral surface of the hemisphere is mainly supplied by the middle cerebral artery. This includes the territories of the motor and somatosensory cortices, which represent the whole of the body, apart from the lower limb, and also the auditory cortex and language areas. The anterior cerebral artery supplies a strip next to the superomedial border of the hemisphere, as far back as the parieto-occipital sulcus. The occipital lobe and most of the inferior temporal gyrus (excluding the temporal pole) are supplied by the posterior cerebral artery.</div><div class="text" id="p0735">Medial and inferior surfaces of the hemisphere are supplied by the anterior, middle and posterior cerebral arteries. The area supplied by the anterior cerebral artery is the largest; it extends almost to the parieto-occipital sulcus and includes the medial part of the orbital surface. The rest of the orbital surface and the temporal pole are supplied by the middle cerebral artery, and the remaining medial and inferior surfaces are supplied by the posterior cerebral artery.</div><div class="text" id="p0740">Near the occipital pole, the junctional zone between the territories of the middle and posterior cerebral arteries corresponds to the visual (striate) cortex, which receives information from the macula. When the posterior cerebral artery is occluded, a phenomenon known as ‘macular sparing’ may occur, in which vision with the central part of the retina is preserved. Collateral circulation of blood from branches of the middle cerebral artery into those of the posterior cerebral artery may account for this phenomenon. In addition, in some individuals, the middle cerebral artery may itself supply the macular area.</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s0525"/><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle0455">Arterial Supply of the Spinal Cord, Roots and Nerves</h2><div class="textfl" id="p0745">The spinal cord and its roots and nerves are supplied with blood by both longitudinal and segmental vessels (see <a href="../B9780702077050000471/B9780702077050000471.xhtml#f0070">Fig. 47.11</a>). Three major longitudinal vessels, a single anterior and two posterior spinal arteries <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E68" id="pagebreak_1.464E68"></span><a id="pg1464.e66"/>(each of which is sometimes doubled to pass on either side of the dorsal rootlets) originate intracranially from the vertebral artery and terminate in a plexus around the conus medullaris. The anterior spinal artery forms from the fused anterior spinal branches of the vertebral artery, and descends in the ventral median fissure of the cord. Each posterior spinal artery originates either directly from the ipsilateral vertebral artery or from its posterior inferior cerebellar branch, and descends in a posterolateral sulcus of the cord. The segmental arteries are derived in craniocaudal sequence from spinal branches of the vertebral, deep cervical, intercostal and lumbar arteries. These vessels enter the vertebral canal through the intervertebral foramina and anastomose with branches of the longitudinal vessels to form a pial plexus on the surface of the cord. The segmental spinal arteries send anterior and posterior radicular branches to the spinal cord along the ventral and dorsal roots. Most anterior radicular arteries are small and end in the ventral nerve roots or in the pial plexus of the cord. The small posterior radicular arteries also supply the dorsal root ganglia; branches enter at both ganglionic poles to be distributed around ganglion cells and nerve fibres (see also <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib62" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_62">Crock (1996)</a>.)</div><section><a id="s0530"/><section><a id="s0535"/><section><a id="s0540"/><h3 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0460">Segmental radiculomedullary feeder arteries</h3><div class="textfl" id="p0750">Some radicular arteries, mainly situated in the lower cervical, lower thoracic and upper lumbar regions, are large enough to reach the ventral median fissure, where they divide into slender ascending and large descending branches. These are the anterior radiculomedullary feeder arteries (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib79" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_79">Dommisse 1975</a>). They anastomose with the anterior spinal arteries to form a single or partly double longitudinal vessel of uneven calibre along the ventral median fissure. The largest anterior medullary feeder, the great anterior radiculomedullary artery of Adamkiewicz, varies in level, arising from a spinal branch of either one of the lower posterior intercostal arteries (T9–T11), or of the subcostal artery (T12), or less frequently of the upper lumbar arteries (L1 and L2). It most often arises on the left side (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib47" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_47">Carmichael and Gloviczki 1999</a>). Reaching the spinal cord, it sends a branch to the anterior spinal artery below and another to anastomose with the ramus of the posterior spinal artery, which lies anterior to the dorsal roots. It may be the main supply to the lower two-thirds of the cord. Central branches of the anterior spinal artery enter the ventral median fissure, and then turn right or left to supply the ventral grey column, the base of the dorsal grey column, including the dorsal nucleus, and the adjacent white matter (see <a href="../B9780702077050000471/B9780702077050000471.xhtml#f0075">Fig. 47.12</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0755">Each posterior spinal artery contributes to a pair of longitudinal anastomotic channels, anterior and posterior to the dorsal spinal roots. These are reinforced by posterior medullary feeders from the posterior radicular arteries. The latter are variable in number and size, but smaller, more numerous and more evenly distributed than the anterior medullary feeders. The anterior channel is joined by a ramus from the descending branch of the great anterior segmental medullary artery of Adamkiewicz. In all longitudinal spinal arteries the width of the lumen is uneven and complete interruptions may occur. At the conus medullaris they communicate by anastomotic loops. Anastomoses other than those between the pial or peripheral spinal arterial branches may be important, e.g. a posterior spinal series of anastomoses between rami of the dorsal divisions of segmental arteries near the spinous processes.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s0545"/><section><a id="s0550"/><section><a id="s0555"/><h4 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0465">Intramedullary arteries</h4><div class="textfl" id="p0760">The central branches of the anterior spinal artery supply about two-thirds of the cross-sectional area of the cord. The rest of the dorsal grey and white columns and peripheral parts of the lateral and ventral white columns are supplied by numerous small radial vessels that branch from posterior spinal arteries and the pial plexus. In a microangiographic study of the human cervical spinal cord, up to six anterior, and eight posterior, radicular spinal arteries were described, and up to eight central branches arose from each centimetre of the anterior spinal artery (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib312" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_312">Turnbull et al 1966</a>). Abnormalities of blood vessels in the spinal cord can result in clinically significant haemorrhages and neurological events (see <a href="../B9780702077050000471/B9780702077050000471.xhtml#f0080">Fig. 47.13</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0560"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0470">Spinal cord ischaemia</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0765">The spinal cord can rely for neither its transverse nor its longitudinal blood supply entirely on the longitudinal arteries. The anterior longitudinal artery and the intramedullary arteries are functional end-arteries, although overlap of territories of supply has been described (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib9" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_9">Backes and Nijenhuis 2008</a>). Damage to the anterior longitudinal artery can result in loss of function of the anterior two-thirds of the cord (see <a href="../B9780702077050000471/B9780702077050000471.xhtml#f0085">Fig. 47.14</a>). The longitudinal arteries cannot supply the whole length of the cord, and the input of the segmental medullary feeder vessels is essential. This is especially true of the artery of Adamkiewicz, which may effectively carry the major supply for the lower cord; damage to this individual artery compromises perfusion of the distal cord and may be responsible for paraplegia following aortic bypass procedures. For many years it was assumed that the anterior spinal artery system provided the dominant supply to the cord, but clinical evidence implies that the posterior spinal arteries may be as important as the anterior system in protecting the cord. The mid-thoracic cord, distant from the main anterior medullary feeders, is particularly liable to become ischaemic after periods of hypotension; T4–T9 has been described as the critical vascular zone of the spinal cord, where interference with the circulation is most likely to result in paraplegia.</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s0565"/><hgroup><h2 class="h1hd" id="cesectitle0475">Arterial Supply of the Thorax, Abdomen and Pelvis</h2><h3 class="h2after1" id="cesectitle0480">Pulmonary trunk</h3></hgroup><section><a id="s0570"/><div class="textfl" id="p0770">The pulmonary trunk conveys deoxygenated blood from the right ventricle to the lungs (see <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0130">Figs 57.4</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0015">57.10</a>). About 5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm in length and 3<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm in diameter, it is the most anterior of the cardiac vessels and arises from the pulmonary anulus surrounding the subpulmonary conus arteriosus (infundibulum) at the base of the right ventricle, superior and to the left of the supraventricular crest. The pulmonary trunk inclines posterosuperiorly and divides into right and left pulmonary arteries, of almost equal size, at the level of the body of the sixth thoracic vertebra (range, bodies of the fourth to the eighth thoracic vertebrae), 2–3<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span> cm inferior to the sternal plane and inferior to the aortic arch to the left of the midline (see <a href="../B9780702077050000525/B9780702077050000525.xhtml#t0015">Table 52.2</a>). The bifurcation of the pulmonary trunk commonly lies anteroinferior and to the left of the tracheal bifurcation and the associated subcarinal (inferior tracheobronchial) lymph nodes and deep cardiac plexus. In the fetus, at the level of the tracheal bifurcation, the left pulmonary artery is connected to the aortic arch by the ductus arteriosus, the obliterated remnant of which forms the ligamentum arteriosum in the adult (<a href="../B9780702077050000136/B9780702077050000136.xhtml">Ch. 13</a>).</div><section><a id="s0575"/><section><a id="s0580"/><section><a id="s0585"/><section><a id="s0590"/><section><a id="s0595"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle0485">Relations</p><div class="textfl" id="p0775">The pulmonary trunk is located entirely within the pericardium, enclosed with the ascending aorta in a common sheath of visceral pericardium (see <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0010">Figs 57.1</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000586/B9780702077050000586.xhtml#f0010">58.1</a>). The fibrous pericardium gradually blends with and disappears within the adventitia of the pulmonary arteries. Anteriorly, it is separated from the sternal end of the left second intercostal space, and/or the third costal cartilage, by the pericardium, pleura, left lung and the superior part of transversus thoracis. Posterior relations of the proximal part near to its origin are the ascending aorta and left coronary artery, and superiorly, the left atrium. Moving superiorly, the ascending aorta spirals around the pulmonary trunk and comes to lie to the right of its more superior part. The atrial auricles and left and right coronary arteries lie on each side of its origin. The superficial cardiac plexus lies between the branching of the pulmonary trunk and the aortic arch (see <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0110">Fig. 57.61</a>). The tracheal bifurcation and subcarinal lymph nodes are superior and to the right (see <a href="../B9780702077050000525/B9780702077050000525.xhtml#f0040">Fig. 52.7</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0600"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle0490">Variants and congenital anomalies</p><div class="textfl" id="p0780">The pulmonary trunk is a relatively constant structure and there are minimal variations in healthy individuals. Congenital anomalies include pulmonary atresia and truncus arteriosus (common truncus).</div><div class="text" id="p0785">The coronary arteries usually originate from the aortic sinuses, but occasionally may arise from ectopic locations. Most commonly, an ectopic left coronary artery arises from the pulmonary trunk or one of its branches (Bland–White–Garland syndrome) (see <a href="../B9780702077050000586/B9780702077050000586.xhtml#f0020">Fig. 58.2</a>). This potentially fatal condition requires urgent surgical correction because the myocardium is supplied with deoxygenated pulmonary blood instead of systemic blood (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib170" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_170">Loukas et al 2009</a>). Infantile symptoms include pallor, fatigue, irritability, weak cry, cough, dyspnoea, and signs of ischaemia and cardiac failure precipitated during or after feeding, or during defecation or crying. The electrocardiogram may reveal deep narrow Q waves, left ventricular hypertrophy and left axis deviation. Radiologically, cardiomegaly is present with left ventricular and left atrial enlargement. Colour flow imaging can identify the anomalous origin of the left coronary artery. The pulmonary trunk may also give rise to the right coronary artery, the left anterior interventricular branch of the left coronary artery, or even both coronary arteries. Typically, there is an extensive development of collateral vessels in the heart (see <a href="../B9780702077050000586/B9780702077050000586.xhtml">Fig. 58.3</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0790">Pulmonary atresia is caused by a complete obstruction of pulmonary outflow and may be due to an absence or defect of the pulmonary valvular leaflets. It is associated with a blind-ending pulmonary trunk that causes right ventricular hypoplasia. Reduced flow may render the <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E69" id="pagebreak_1.464E69"></span><a id="pg1464.e67"/>pulmonary trunk atretic, small or even normal in size, making diagnosis challenging. A diminished pulmonary flow is supplied through a patent ductus arteriosus (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib279" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_279">Smith and McKay 2004</a>), and a concomitant ventricular septal defect may permit outflow from the right ventricle. Surgical repair is necessary to allow adequate oxygenation of blood throughout the body.</div><div class="text" id="p0795">In truncus arteriosus (common truncus), a single common arterial trunk exits the heart and subsequently divides into the pulmonary trunk and the ascending aorta. Early neonatal life is possible because there is usually a coexisting ventricular septal defect; expedited surgical repair is necessary to avoid congestive heart failure, failure to thrive and death.</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s0605"/><h4 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0495">Right pulmonary artery</h4><div class="textfl" id="p0800">The right pulmonary artery divides into two large branches posterior to the superior vena cava, or immediately lateral to its right side (see <a href="../B9780702077050000549/B9780702077050000549.xhtml#f0050">Fig. 54.13</a>). This intimate relationship facilitates the cavopulmonary anastomosis (the Glenn shunt) conceived to bypass the defective right heart chambers in various congenital cardiac disorders. A lymph node usually lies adjacent to the bifurcation. The smaller branch to the superior lobe usually divides again, supplying the majority of that lobe. The inferior branch descends anterior to the bronchus intermedius and posterior to the superior pulmonary vein. It provides a small recurrent branch to the superior lobe, and then, at the point where the horizontal fissure meets the oblique fissure, it gives off the branch to the middle lobe anteriorly, and a branch to the superior segment of the inferior lobe posteriorly. It then continues a short distance before dividing to supply the rest of the inferior lobe segments.</div></section><section><a id="s0610"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0500">Left pulmonary artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0805">The left pulmonary artery emerges from under the concavity of the aortic arch and descends anterior to the descending thoracic aorta to enter the oblique fissure. The ligamentum arteriosum passes between the superior aspect of the left pulmonary artery and the proximal descending thoracic aorta; the aorta is relatively fixed in position by the ligament, and so may be ruptured in this region in cases of major trauma associated with rapid deceleration. The left recurrent laryngeal nerve branches from the left vagus nerve, passes inferior to the aorta to the left of the ligamentum arteriosum, and then courses superiorly posterior to the aortic arch; it is a close relation of the superior part of the left lung root and hilum, where it may be compressed or invaded by lung tumour. The branches of the left pulmonary artery are variable (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib276" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_276">Sivrikoz 2016</a>). The first and largest branch is usually given off to the anterior segment of the left superior lobe. Before reaching the oblique fissure, the artery gives off a variable number of other branches to the superior lobe; it usually supplies a large branch to the superior segment of the inferior lobe as it enters the fissure. Lingular branches arise within the fissure, and the rest of the lower lobe is supplied by many varied branching patterns. It was a surgical aphorism of the late Lord Brock that when performing a left upper lobectomy, ‘there was always one more branch of the pulmonary artery than you thought!’</div><div class="text" id="p0810">Unilateral absence of a pulmonary artery is a rare congenital anomaly characterized by normal lung volume and anatomy at birth. Revascularization before the age of 6 months avoids the development of lung hypoplasia (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib4" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_4">Alison et al 2011</a>). The left pulmonary artery sling is a congenital anomaly where the left pulmonary artery arises from the right pulmonary artery, travels posteriorly over the right main bronchus and then passes between the trachea and oesophagus: it is associated with significant tracheobronchial stenosis (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib335" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_335">Zhong et al 2010</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0615"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0505">Pulmonary sequestration</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0815">When a portion of lung exists without the appropriate bronchial and vascular connections, it is usually supplied by the systemic vasculature (descending thoracic or abdominal aorta or its branches) and drains into either the atria, superior vena cava or azygos venous system (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib56" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_56">Clements 1999</a>) (see <a href="../B9780702077050000549/B9780702077050000549.xhtml#f0100">Figs 54.14</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000549/B9780702077050000549.xhtml#f0105">54.15</a>). Extralobar pulmonary sequestration segments are covered by visceral pleura and usually found below the left inferior lobe, whereas intralobar anomalies are usually embedded in normal lung, classically, in the posterior basal segment of the left inferior lobe. Extralobar pulmonary sequestration is normally asymptomatic but often associated with other congenital anomalies such as pulmonary hypoplasia, congenital diaphragmatic hernia, congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation and congenital heart disorders (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib286" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_286">Stocker et al 1978</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib152" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_152">Kravitz 1994</a>). A fistula into the oesophagus may also develop. Consideration of differential diagnoses that include mediastinal or pulmonary tumours is mandatory.</div></section><section><a id="s0620"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0510">Pulmonary embolism and arteriography</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0820">A thrombus that has developed in the deep venous system (usually in the lower limb or pelvis) may embolize and travel in the right side of the circulation through the right atrium and right ventricle and lodge in the pulmonary vasculature. The clinical abnormalities observed depend on the size of the embolus and on the number and frequency of embolic episodes. Large emboli may lodge in branches of the main pulmonary artery and cause right ventricular dysfunction and hypoxia, representing a medical emergency. Smaller emboli may lodge in segmental pulmonary arteries and cause pleuritic chest pain, shortness of breath and haemoptysis, although the clinical picture is rarely pathognomonic. Pulmonary emboli cause a ventilation/perfusion ratio mismatch that can have serious physiological implications leading to a significant reduction in the oxygenation of blood. Ventilation/perfusion scans with radiolabelled xenon and technetium usually demonstrate segmental abnormalities in perfusion with normal ventilation in the corresponding regions. Pulmonary emboli may also be evaluated by contrast-enhanced spiral CT or pulmonary angiograms and appear as filling defects. Repetitive embolization may eventually lead to a dramatic reduction of the pulmonary vascular bed and chronic cor pulmonale. Thrombolysis, anticoagulation or inferior vena caval filters prevent progression or recurrence of embolism. A clot may also traverse a patent foramen ovale and lodge in the arterial system (paradoxical embolism), most severely in the cerebral circulation resulting in stroke (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib140" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_140">Kent and Thaler 2011</a>).</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s0625"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle0515">Aorta</h3><div class="textfl" id="p9020">For descriptive purposes, the aorta is divided into ascending, arch, descending thoracic and abdominal parts.</div><section><a id="s0630"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0520">Ascending aorta</h4><div class="textfl" id="p0825">The ascending aorta is typically about 5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm in length. It originates at the base of the left ventricle, commonly level with the inferior border of the third left costal cartilage, and initially ascends whilst curving anteriorly and to the right. It passes from posterior to the left half of the sternum to become the aortic arch posterior to the right half of the inferior part of the manubrium sterni, or the manubriosternal joint (level with the right second costal cartilage), or the superior part of the right side of the sternal body (level with the right second intercostal space). In children, the diameter of the thoracic aorta correlates most closely with body surface area (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib141" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_141">Kervancioglu et al 2006</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib134" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_134">Kaiser et al 2008</a>).</div><section><a id="s0635"/><section><a id="s0640"/><section><a id="s0645"/><section><a id="s0650"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle0525">Relations</p><div class="textfl" id="p0830">The ascending aorta lies within the fibrous pericardium, enclosed in a tube of visceral serous pericardium together with the pulmonary trunk (see <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0010">Figs 57.1</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0130">57.4</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000586/B9780702077050000586.xhtml#f0010">58.1</a>). The conus arteriosus of the right ventricle, initial segment of the pulmonary trunk and right auricle are anterior to its lower part. Superiorly, it is separated from the sternum by the pericardium, the pleura and the anterior border of the right lung, loose areolar tissue and the thymus or its remnants. The left atrium, right pulmonary artery and right main bronchus are posterior. The superior vena cava (also partly posterior) and the right atrium are to the right. The left atrium and, more superiorly, the pulmonary trunk are to the left. At least two para-aortic bodies (aortopulmonary paraganglia) lie between the ascending aorta and the pulmonary trunk. Relative to the ascending aorta, the inferior para-aortic body is located on its anterior surface near to the heart, and the middle para-aortic body is located on its right side.</div><div class="text" id="p0835">The aortopulmonary window is a space between the pulmonary trunk and aortic arch, bordered by the ascending aorta anteriorly, the descending aorta posteriorly, the mediastinal part of the parietal pleura laterally and the left main bronchus medially (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib69" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_69">Deutsch and Savides 2005</a>) (see <a href="../B9780702077050000586/B9780702077050000586.xhtml#f0010">Figs 58.1</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000586/B9780702077050000586.xhtml#f0020">58.4</a>). It contains lymph nodes, fatty tissue, the ligamentum arteriosum, the superficial cardiac plexus, cardiac nerves and the left recurrent laryngeal nerve.</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s0655"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0530">Coronary arteries</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0840">The right coronary artery arises from the right aortic sinus and the left coronary artery from the left aortic sinus of the proximal ascending aorta (see <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0200">Figs 57.21</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0055">57.24</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0205">57.41</a>); the level of the opening of each artery is variable. The two arteries form an oblique inverted crown (hence their name) within the atrioventricular sulcus. They also form a variable and often insignificant anastomosis (in the non-pathological state) via marginal and interventricular loops that intersect at the cardiac apex. The main arteries and major branches are usually subepicardial, but those in the atrioventricular and interventricular sulci are often deeply sited, and occasionally hidden by or embedded in overlapping myocardium (myocardial bridging). The left or right coronary artery is classed as being dominant if it gives off the inferior interventricular branch, which supplies the inferior part of the ventricular septum and often part of the inferolateral wall of the left ventricle. The right coronary artery is dominant in around 60% of hearts. Anastomoses <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E70" id="pagebreak_1.464E70"></span><a id="pg1464.e68"/>between right and left coronary arteries are abundant in the fetus but are much reduced by one year of age. Anastomoses providing collateral circulation may become prominent in conditions of chronic hypoxia and in coronary artery disease. An additional collateral circulation is provided by small branches from mediastinal, pericardial and bronchial vessels.</div><div class="text" id="p0845">Normal coronary arterial calibre, based on arterial casts or angiogram measurements, ranges between 1.5 and 5.5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm. The calibre of the left origin exceeds the right in 60% of hearts, the right being larger in 17%, and both vessels being of approximately equal calibre in 23%. The external diameter of the left coronary artery increases from 2.1<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm at the age of 1 year to 3.3<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm at the age of 15 years (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib235" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_235">Pesonen et al 1991</a>) and the diameters of the coronary arteries may increase up to the 30th year. A significant association has been found between the diameters of the right and left coronary arteries at 0 (birth), 1 and 6 months of age and birth weight, height and body surface area (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib136" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_136">Karagol et al 2012</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0850">A wide range of coronary artery anomalies or variants may occur, and are categorized according to the origin (connection), course, area of termination of the artery, or the presence of anastomoses, bridging, fistula or atresia (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib201" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_201">Muresian 2016</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0855">Congenital anomalies of the coronary arteries are found rarely in children. The two most common anomalies are coronary arteriovenous fistula and anomalous left coronary artery arising from the pulmonary trunk (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib315" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_315">Uysal et al 2014</a>). Other congenital anomalies include ectopic origin of circumflex artery (normally a branch of the left coronary artery) from right coronary artery, single coronary artery arising from right aortic sinus, ectopic right coronary artery arising from the left aortic sinus, left or right coronary artery arising from the ascending aorta (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib55" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_55">Clemente et al 2010</a>).</div><section><a id="s0660"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0535">Right coronary artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0860">The right coronary artery arises from the right aortic sinus; its opening is usually below the sinutubular junction (see <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0050">Fig. 57.23</a>). The artery is usually single, although up to four openings have been observed, reflecting the independent origins of the conal, sinuatrial nodal and ventricular arteries (see <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0090">Figs 57.42</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0265">57.43</a>). The right coronary artery passes at first anteriorly and slightly to the right between the right atrial auricle and pulmonary trunk. On reaching the atrioventricular sulcus, it descends almost vertically to the right side of the inferior cardiac border, curving around it into the inferior part of the sulcus in which it passes towards the cardiac crux (the junction of the atrioventricular, interatrial and interventricular sulci) (see <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0130">Fig. 57.4B</a>). The artery ends a little to the left of the crux, often by anastomosing with the circumflex branch of the left coronary artery. The right coronary artery may end near the right cardiac border, between this and the crux, or more often it reaches the left border, replacing the more distal part of the circumflex artery. Its branches supply the right and variable parts of the left chambers and atrioventricular septum. Usually, the first branch is the conal branch of the right coronary artery (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib172" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_172">Loukas et al 2014</a>). This vessel arises independently from the right aortic sinus in approximately 33% of hearts and is sometimes termed the third coronary artery, but this is an inappropriate term because a similarly named vessel arises from the left coronary circulation. The conal branch of the right coronary artery branches anteroinferiorly over the conus arteriosus (infundibulum) and over the superior aspect of the right ventricle, sometimes anastomosing with a similar branch from the anterior interventricular (left anterior descending) artery to form Vieussens arterial ring, an inconstant anastomosis around the right ventricular outflow tract that may provide an important collateral circulation in cases of arterial occlusion (see <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0270">Figs 57.44</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0095">57.45</a>) (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib170" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Loukas et al 2009</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0865">The first segment of the right coronary artery (between its origin and the right side of the inferior cardiac margin) gives off anterior atrial and ventricular branches that diverge widely. The ventricular arteries arise at almost 90° from the right coronary artery, an arrangement that is in marked contrast to the more acutely angled origins of the ventricular branches of the left coronary artery. The anterior ventricular branches, usually two or three, ramify towards the cardiac apex, but they rarely reach the apex unless the right marginal artery is included within this group. The right marginal artery is greater in calibre than the other anterior ventricular arteries and reaches the cardiac apex in most hearts. When it is very large, there may be no additional anterior ventricular branch. Two, sometimes three, small inferior ventricular branches, arise from the second segment of the right coronary artery between the right side of the inferior cardiac margin and cardiac crux to supply the inferior aspect of the right ventricle. Their size is inversely proportional to that of the right marginal artery, which usually extends to the inferior cardiac surface. On approaching the cardiac crux, the right coronary artery normally produces up to three inferior interventricular branches (occasionally none). The actual inferior interventricular artery sits within the interventricular sulcus, and may be flanked either to the right or left, or on both sides, by these parallel branches. When these flanking vessels exist, branches of the inferior interventricular artery are small and sparse. The inferior interventricular artery is occasionally replaced by a branch of the left coronary artery. Although the atrial branches of the right coronary artery are sometimes described as part of anterior, lateral (right or marginal) and posterior groups, they are usually small single vessels, 1<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm in diameter (see <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0275">Figs 57.46</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0285">57.48</a>). The right anterior and lateral branches (occasionally double, and very rarely triple) mainly supply the right atrium. The posterior branch is usually single and supplies both atria.</div><div class="text" id="p0870">The artery of the sinuatrial node is an atrial branch of variable origin, distributed largely to right atrial myocardium. Its origin is variable: most commonly, it arises as the first atrial branch of the right coronary artery, less often from its right lateral atrial branch, and least often from its inferior atrioventricular part. It may sometimes originate from the circumflex branch of the left coronary artery. It usually passes posteriorly in the groove between the right atrial auricle and ascending aorta, and branches around the junction of the superior vena cava and right atrium, typically as an arterial loop from which small branches supply the right atrium. A large branch, the ramus cristae terminalis, traverses and supplies the sinuatrial node: it would seem more appropriate to name this branch the nodal artery, given that the vessel currently bearing this name is predominantly atrial in distribution.</div><div class="text" id="p0875">Septal perforating branches of the right coronary artery are relatively short and leave the inferior interventricular branch to supply the inferior part (about one-third) of the interventricular septum. They are numerous but do not usually reach the apical region of the septum. The largest inferior septal perforating artery, usually the first branch, commonly arises from the inverted loop said to characterize the right coronary artery at the crux and it almost always supplies the atrioventricular node. Small, recurrent atrioventricular branches originate from the ventricular branches of the right coronary artery as they cross the atrioventricular sulcus and supply adjacent atrial myocardium.</div></section><section><a id="s0665"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0540">Left coronary artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p0880">The left coronary artery is usually larger in calibre than the right. It supplies a greater volume of myocardium, including almost all of the left ventricle and atrium, and most of the interventricular septum (see <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0090">Figs 57.42</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0290">57.49</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0300">57.51</a>). In hearts with right dominance, the right coronary artery supplies a variable amount of the inferior region of the left ventricle (see <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0085">Fig. 57.41A–C</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0885">The left coronary artery arises from the left aortic sinus. The opening of the artery sometimes lies inferior to the margin of the valve leaflets and may be double, usually leading into the circumflex and anterior interventricular (left anterior descending) branches of the left coronary artery. Its initial portion, between its opening and first branches, varies in length from a few millimetres to a few centimetres. The artery lies between the pulmonary trunk and the left atrial auricle, emerging into the atrioventricular sulcus, where it turns left. This part is loosely embedded in subepicardial fat and usually has no branches, but may give off a small atrial branch and, rarely, the sinuatrial nodal artery. Reaching the atrioventricular sulcus, the left coronary artery divides into its two main branches: the circumflex and anterior interventricular arteries.</div><div class="text" id="p0890">The anterior interventricular artery is commonly described as the continuation of the left coronary artery. It descends obliquely forwards and to the left in the interventricular sulcus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0100">Fig. 57.52</a>), sometimes deeply embedded in or crossed by myocardial tissue (myocardial bridges), and by the great cardiac vein and its tributaries.</div><div class="text" id="p0895">Myocardial bridges are reported to have a frequency varying from 0.5 to 40% when identified clinically and from 15 to 85% when found at autopsy (see <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0305">Fig. 57.53</a>). The wide variation in frequency indicates that many bridges may be asymptomatic during life. The major clinical conditions produced by a myocardial bridge are cardiac ischaemia, atherosclerosis and sudden cardiac death. The incidence of atherosclerosis is increased when the right coronary artery is bridged. Although a relationship between myocardial bridges and sudden cardiac death has not been established, autopsy series have shown histological evidence of otherwise unexplained ischaemia in individuals with myocardial bridges; many died during exercise and had no other risk factors for coronary arterial disease.</div><div class="text" id="p0900">Almost invariably, the anterior interventricular artery reaches the cardiac apex, where it terminates in around 33% of hearts. More frequently, it curves around the notch of the cardiac apex into the inferior interventricular sulcus and passes one-third to one-half of the way along its length, meeting the terminal parts of the inferior interventricular branches of the right coronary artery.</div><div class="text" id="p0905">The anterior interventricular artery gives off right and left anterior ventricular and anterior septal branches, and a variable number of <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E71" id="pagebreak_1.464E71"></span><a id="pg1464.e69"/>corresponding posterior branches. Anterior right ventricular branches are small and rarely number more than one or two; the right ventricle is supplied almost entirely by the right coronary artery. Up to nine large left anterior ventricular arteries branch at acute angles from the anterior interventricular artery, crossing the anterior aspect of the left ventricle diagonally, with the largest reaching the rounded left (obtuse) cardiac border. One, termed the left diagonal artery, often dominates, sometimes arising separately from the left coronary artery, which then ends by trifurcation. It is reported in at least 33–50% of hearts, and may be doubled in around 20%. A small left conal artery frequently leaves the anterior interventricular artery near its origin, and anastomoses on the conus arteriosus with its counterpart from the right coronary artery and with the vasa vasorum of the pulmonary trunk and aorta. The anterior septal perforating branches leave the anterior interventricular artery almost perpendicularly, and pass posteroinferiorly within the septum, usually supplying its anterior two-thirds. The first septal perforator artery usually supplies the atrioventricular bundle at the point of its division. Small inferior septal branches from the same source supply the inferior third of the septum for a variable distance from the cardiac apex (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib170" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Loukas et al 2009</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0910">The circumflex branch of the left coronary artery, comparable to the anterior interventricular artery in calibre, curves leftwards in the atrioventricular sulcus, and continues around the left cardiac border into the posterior and then inferior part of the sulcus, terminating to the left of the cardiac crux in most hearts, although sometimes continuing as the inferior interventricular artery. Proximally, the left atrial auricle usually overlaps it. A large ventricular branch, the left marginal artery, normally arises from the left circumflex artery at a 90° angle and branches over the rounded left border, supplying much of the adjacent left ventricle, typically to its apex. Smaller anterior and inferior branches of the circumflex artery also supply the left ventricle. Anterior ventricular branches (from one to five, commonly two or three) course parallel to the diagonal artery when it is present, and replace it when it is absent. Inferior ventricular branches are smaller and fewer because the left ventricle is partly supplied by the inferior interventricular artery. When this artery is small or absent, it is accompanied or replaced by often doubled or tripled interventricular continuations of the circumflex artery.</div><div class="text" id="p0915">The artery to the sinuatrial node is often derived from the first 1–2<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm of the circumflex artery after its origin from the left coronary artery (anterior circumflex segment) and less often from the remaining length of the circumflex artery. It passes over and supplies the left atrium, encircles the superior vena cava (similar to a right coronary sinuatrial nodal branch) and sends a large branch through the node; despite its name, it is predominantly atrial in distribution. The artery to the atrioventricular node, sometimes the terminal branch of the circumflex artery (20%), arises near the cardiac crux. When this occurs, the circumflex artery usually gives off the inferior interventricular artery, an example of left dominance.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0670"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0545">Coronary arterial distribution</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0920">Details of coronary arterial distribution should be integrated into a concept of total cardiac supply. Most commonly, the right coronary artery supplies all of the right ventricle (except a narrow strip to the right of the anterior interventricular sulcus); a variable part of the inferior aspect of the left ventricle; the inferior one-third of the interventricular septum; the right atrium and part of the left atrium; the conduction system as far as the proximal parts of the right and left bundles (branches of the atrioventricular bundle). Left coronary distribution is reciprocal and includes most of the left ventricle; a narrow strip of right ventricle; the anterior two-thirds of the interventricular septum; most of the left atrium. Variations in the coronary arterial system mainly affect the inferior aspect of the ventricles and reflect the relative dominance of coronary arterial supply (see <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0085">Fig. 57.41</a>). The term dominance is misleading because the left artery almost always supplies a greater volume of tissue than the right. In right dominance, the inferior interventricular artery is derived from the right coronary artery, and in left dominance it is derived from the left coronary artery. In the balanced pattern of supply, branches of both the left and right coronary arteries run in or near the inferior interventricular sulcus.</div><div class="text" id="p0925">Less is known about variations in atrial supply because the small vessels involved are not easily preserved in the corrosion casts that are used for analysis. In more than 50% of individuals, the right atrium is supplied by the right coronary artery alone. More than 62% of left atria are supplied mainly by the left coronary artery, 27% by the right coronary artery (in each group a small accessory supply from the other coronary artery exists), and 11% are supplied almost equally by both arteries. Arterial supply to the sinuatrial and atrioventricular nodes also varies: the sinuatrial node is supplied more often by the right coronary artery and fewer than 10% of sinuatrial nodes receive a bilateral supply. The atrioventricular node is usually supplied by the right coronary artery.</div><div class="text" id="p0930">Uncommonly, variants of coronary arteries may be present and are the second most common cause of sudden cardiac death in young athletes. Anomalous origins of the coronary artery, particularly from the contralateral aortic sinus, is the variant that is most commonly associated with sudden cardiac death. Other anomalies include left coronary artery origin from the pulmonary trunk, coronary fistula and left main stem atresia (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib137" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_137">Kastellanos et al 2018</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0675"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0550">Coronary anastomoses</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0935">The cardiac collateral circulation represents a built-in system for coronary arterial bypass. The first few centimetres of the main stems of the left and right coronary arteries are devoid of anastomotic branches. Collateral channels are abundant further distally, exhibiting variable calibres and occupying numerous locations, allowing for bidirectional flow between most arteries. Approximately 30 different sites of collateral extramural vessels have been described, the most frequent being at the cardiac apex; the anterior aspect of the right ventricle; the inferior aspect of the left ventricle; the cardiac crux; the interatrial and interventricular sulci; between the sinuatrial nodal and other atrial vessels (see <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0270">Figs 57.44</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0095">57.45</a>). Anastomoses between branches of the coronary arteries, both subepicardial and myocardial, and between these arteries and extracardiac vessels, are of great clinical importance. Clinical studies suggest that anastomoses cannot rapidly provide collateral routes sufficient to circumvent sudden coronary obstruction (see <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0270">Figs 57.44</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0095">57.45</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0270">57.54</a>). Nevertheless, it has long been established that anastomoses do occur, particularly between fine subepicardial branches, and they may increase during the life of an individual by both angiogenesis and arteriogenesis. The Vieussens arterial ring is a collateral vessel that crosses the conus arteriosus inferior to the pulmonary trunk, and provides an anastomosis between the conal branches of the right coronary artery and the anterior interventricular artery. The artery to the sinuatrial node commonly provides a communication between the proximal parts of the left and right coronary arteries. The apical collateral artery joins the interventricular arteries. The frequent enlargement of the first septal branch of the anterior interventricular artery, Kugel’s anastomotic artery (arteria anastomotica auricularis magna), has been described as running between the proximal parts of the coronary arteries along the anterosuperior margin of the fossa ovalis to anastomose with the distal part of the right coronary artery. Clinical imaging (catheter angiography and colour Doppler ultrasound) has led to the development of a grading system to describe the overall pattern of cardiac collateral arteries (see <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#t0010">Table 57.1</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0680"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0555">Extracardiac anastomoses</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0940">Extracardiac anastomoses connect various coronary arterial branches with other intrathoracic vessels, most commonly involving the bronchial and internal thoracic arteries (see <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0310">Fig. 57.54</a>). To a much lesser degree, anastomoses between coronary arteries and pericardiacophrenic branches of the internal thoracic, anterior mediastinal, intercostal and oesophageal arteries also exist.</div><div class="text" id="p0945">The posterior pericardium also receives a direct supply from the bronchial arteries: extracardiac coronary anastomoses involving bronchial arteries are typically found at the pericardial reflections, such as the points of entry of the superior and inferior venae cavae. The most common anastomoses are with the circumflex branch of the left coronary artery via the posterior pericardial reflections and reflect the close proximity of the bronchial arteries within the root of the lung. In pathological conditions, notably those resulting in pericardial adhesions, it is also possible for extracardiac anastomoses to develop through trans-pericardial vascularization. Extracardiac communications also exist with coronary atrial branches, especially the sinuatrial nodal artery. The effectiveness of any of these connections as collateral routes in coronary occlusion is not well quantified. Coronary arteriovenous anastomoses and numerous connections between the coronary circulation and cardiac cavities, producing so-called ‘myocardial sinusoids’ and ‘arterioluminal vessels’, have been reported, but their importance in coronary disease remains uncertain.</div></section><section><a id="s0685"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0560">Coronary angiography</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0950">Coronary angiography may be performed by introducing a catheter through the femoral, radial or brachial artery. The femoral artery is punctured with a needle 3<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm below the inguinal ligament while the leg is held adducted and slightly externally rotated. The exact position is guided by palpation of the femoral arterial pulse, and the needle is inserted at an angle of 45° to the artery. After arterial puncture, a fine guidewire is inserted through the needle and fed into the artery. The catheter is then inserted over the guidewire and passed through the external and common iliac arteries into the abdominal aorta, then through the descending thoracic aorta, aortic arch and ascending aorta. <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E72" id="pagebreak_1.464E72"></span><a id="pg1464.e70"/>The brachial or radial artery may be used for percutaneous access to the circulation. Once the catheter is located in the ascending aorta, a variety of guidewires may be used to enter the coronary vessels for selective arteriography and interventions. Angiography is performed with standard high osmolality contrast medium and cine-angiography. In selected patients, new-generation, low osmolality contrast medium may be used. All the coronary arteries are catheterized and visualized in a variety of views to obtain a full evaluation of their anatomy and to determine the location and degree of any stenosis (see <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0315">Figs 57.55</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0320">57.56</a>). The opening of the left coronary artery arises from the left aortic sinus and is best viewed in the direct frontal and left anterior oblique projections. The right anterior oblique view is useful in demonstrating the diagonal and anterior interventricular branches of the left coronary artery. The right coronary artery originates from the right aortic sinus and is usually visualized in the right anterior oblique view. Pressure and oxygen saturations can be measured via the catheter; changes in pressure across valves allow the degree of stenosis to be measured. Coronary blood flow and relative flow reserve can also be calculated. Significant stenosis may be treated initially by balloon angioplasty followed by stent insertion. The balloon exerts pressure against the plaque in the arterial wall, fracturing and splitting the plaque. The splinting effect of the plaque and elastic recoil are reduced, resulting in an increase in the arterial lumen. Stent insertion reduces the rate of re-stenosis.</div></section><section><a id="s0690"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0565">Coronary revascularization</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0955">Atherosclerosis causing more than 60% stenosis of the terminal diameter of the coronary arteries is likely to cause significant reduction in myocardial perfusion. Patients with high-grade lesions, left main stem coronary artery or triple-vessel disease with impaired left ventricular function are usually considered for coronary artery bypass grafting. The common grafts that are used are the internal thoracic (mammary) and radial arteries. The left internal thoracic artery and radial artery grafts have a greater patency rate than saphenous vein grafts. Approximately 15% of saphenous vein grafts occlude in 1 year and, from then on, at an annual rate of 1–2% in the first 6 years and 4% thereafter; between 40% and 50% of saphenous vein grafts have occluded by 10 years, whereas only about 10% of left internal thoracic or radial artery grafts will have occluded over this time. The common surgical approach is via a midline sternotomy. If the internal thoracic artery is used as a donor graft, it is divided distally (maintaining its proximal origin from the subclavian artery) and anastomosed to the coronary artery distal to the stenosis. If radial artery grafts are used, they must bridge the stenosis via both proximal and distal anastomoses. In selected cases, minimally invasive direct coronary artery bypass grafting is performed, but the approach is dependent on the vessel being grafted. The anterior approach, via a mini-thoracotomy through the fourth intercostal space, is used for grafting the left anterior interventricular and diagonal arteries. The anterolateral approach, via an incision in the third intercostal space from the mid-clavicular to anterior axillary lines, is used for grafting early marginal branches of the circumflex branch of the left coronary artery. The lateral approach, via a lateral thoracotomy measuring only 10<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm in size through the fifth or sixth intercostal spaces, allows grafting of the circumflex vessels. Extrathoracic approaches that are occasionally used include the subxiphoid approach for the distal part of the right coronary artery and inferior interventricular artery. The vast majority of patients are treated with stent placement (see <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0325">Fig. 57.57</a>). Port access surgery allows for full revascularization with cardiopulmonary bypass and obviates the need for midline sternotomy.</div></section><section><a id="s0695"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0570">Coronary artery fistula</h5><div class="textfl" id="p0960">A coronary artery fistula is an abnormal connection that directly links one or more coronary arteries to a heart chamber or to major thoracic vessels without an interposed capillary bed.</div><div class="text" id="p0965">Coronary artery fistulae are rare (see <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0330">Fig. 57.58</a>); those that arise from a coronary artery and then terminate in a chamber of the heart are known as coronary cameral fistulae, while those terminating in a vein are coronary arteriovenous fistulae. Fistulae may be congenital or may develop later in life. Congenital fistulae are more common and account for 50% of paediatric coronary vascular aberrations: they are believed to be derived from the smallest cardiac (Thebesian) veins. Acquired coronary artery fistulae are most commonly iatrogenic in aetiology but may also occur after traumatic injury. The most commonly seen are of the coronary cameral type, from the right coronary artery into the right side of the heart.</div></section></section><section><a id="s8695"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0575">Aortic arch</h4><div class="textfl" id="p0970">The aortic arch continues from the ascending aorta and lies mainly within the superior mediastinum (see <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0130">Figs 57.4A–C</a>). Its origin, slightly to the right of the midline, is level typically with either the right first intercostal space, the second costal cartilage or the second intercostal space. The arch initially ascends obliquely and posteriorly to the left over the anterior surface of the trachea, and then posteriorly across its left side. It ascends superiorly to the midlevel of the manubrium sterni, and curves around the hilum of the left lung. Posteriorly it descends to the left of the body of the fourth thoracic vertebra: at around the level of the sternal plane, posterior to the second left sternocostal joint, it continues as the descending thoracic aorta. The concavity of the aortic arch may lie superior, on or inferior to the sternal plane: most commonly it is inferior to the plane (see <a href="../B9780702077050000525/B9780702077050000525.xhtml#f0040">Fig. 52.7</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0975">The shadow of the aortic arch is easily identified in frontal chest radiographs, where it is seen as a rounded leftward projection (aortic knuckle) to the left of the manubrium (see <a href="../B9780702077050000562/B9780702077050000562.xhtml#f0080">Fig. 56.17</a>). The shadow of the adjacent left superior intercostal vein crossing its left side, from posterior to anterior, may form an additional small rounded shadow termed the ‘aortic nipple’. The aortic arch is best visualized in left anterior oblique views on angiography and with equivalent computed tomography (CT) reconstruction planes, when the pulmonary trunk and its left branch will be seen inferiorly occupying the concavity of the arch.</div><div class="text" id="p0980">The concavity of the aortic arch is the upper curved limit through which structures gain access to, or leave, the hilum of the left lung. The diameter of the aortic arch initially matches that of the ascending aorta but is significantly reduced distal to the origin of the three large branches to the head, neck and upper limbs. The aortic isthmus, a small stricture at the border of the aortic arch with the descending thoracic aorta, may be followed by a dilation; in the fetus, the isthmus lies between the origin of the left subclavian artery and the opening of the ductus arteriosus (<a href="../B9780702077050000136/B9780702077050000136.xhtml">Ch. 13</a>).</div><section><a id="s0705"/><section><a id="s0710"/><section><a id="s0715"/><section><a id="s0720"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle0580">Relations</p><div class="textfl" id="p0985">The left mediastinal part of the parietal pleura is located anterior and to the left of the arch. Deep to the pleura, the arch is crossed, in anteroposterior order, by the left phrenic nerve, left lower cervical cardiac branch of the vagus nerve, left superior cervical cardiac branch(es) of the sympathetic trunk, and the left vagus nerve (see <a href="../B9780702077050000562/B9780702077050000562.xhtml#f0035">Figs 56.7B</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0305">57.61</a>). As the latter crosses the aortic arch, its recurrent laryngeal branch hooks inferior to the vessel, to the left posterior aspect of the ligamentum arteriosum, and then ascends on the right of the aortic arch. The left superior intercostal vein ascends obliquely anteriorly on the arch, anterolateral to the left vagus nerve and posteromedial to the left phrenic nerve and pericardiacophrenic vessels. The left lung and pleura separate all these structures from the thoracic wall. Posterior and to the right are the trachea and the deep cardiac plexus, the left recurrent laryngeal nerve, the oesophagus, thoracic duct and vertebral column. Superiorly, the brachiocephalic trunk, left common carotid and subclavian arteries arise from its convexity (from left-to-right), and are crossed anteriorly near their origins by the left brachiocephalic vein. The branching of the pulmonary trunk, left main bronchus, ligamentum arteriosum, superficial cardiac plexus and the left recurrent laryngeal nerve are typically inferior.</div></section><section><a id="s0725"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle0585">Variants</p><div class="textfl" id="p0990">The most superior level of the aortic arch is typically about 2.5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm inferior to the jugular notch, although this may vary. It is located more superiorly, closer to the jugular notch, in infants and again in senescence when it is a result of vascular ectasia.</div><div class="text" id="p0995">In a right-sided aortic arch, the aorta curves over the hilum of the right lung and descends to the right of the vertebral column: this is usually associated with transposition of the thoraco-abdominal viscera (situs inversus) (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib3" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Akgun et al 2016</a>). Less often, after arching over the hilum of the right lung, the aorta may pass posterior to the oesophagus to gain a left-sided position, and this is not accompanied by visceral transposition. The presence of a right-sided aortic arch is of relevance when planning the repair of oesophageal atresia in neonates.</div><div class="text" id="p1000">The aorta may divide into ascending and descending trunks, the former dividing into three branches to supply the head and upper limbs. Alternatively, it may divide near its origin, producing a double aortic arch; the two branches soon reunite and the oesophagus and trachea usually pass through the interval between them. Entrapment of the oesophagus and/or trachea by the aorta, ductus arteriosus or descending aorta is referred to as a vascular ring.</div><div class="text" id="p1005">There are several variants of this arrangement. The most common are when a right-sided aortic arch and the upper part of the descending thoracic aorta pass anterior to the oesophagus and trachea, and the ductus arteriosus passes posterior to the oesophagus into an aortic diverticulum; a right-sided aortic arch and the upper part of the descending thoracic aorta pass anteriorly, and the ductus arteriosus is inserted into the left subclavian artery that arises as a fourth branch from the aortic arch; a left-sided descending thoracic aorta is attached to a left-sided <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E73" id="pagebreak_1.464E73"></span><a id="pg1464.e71"/>ductus arteriosus anterior to the oesophagus, and a right-sided aortic arch passes posteriorly; the right superior part of the descending thoracic aorta wraps around the oesophagus and the ductus arteriosus is right-sided; the right upper part of the aorta wraps around the oesophagus and the ductus arteriosus is left-sided (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib3" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Akgun et al 2016</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p1010">From right to left, the brachiocephalic trunk, left common carotid and left subclavian arteries arise from the convex aspect of the aortic arch (see <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0125">Figs 57.4</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000586/B9780702077050000586.xhtml#f0010">58.1</a>). These vessels may branch from the beginning of the aortic arch or the superior part of the ascending aorta. The distance between their origins varies, the most frequent being apposition of the left common carotid artery to the brachiocephalic trunk. Multiple variants of their branching pattern have been observed; other branches may arise from the aortic arch, including the inferior thyroid, thyroidea ima, thymic, left coronary and bronchial arteries (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib3" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Akgun et al 2016</a>). The left vertebral artery may arise between the left common carotid and the left subclavian arteries.</div><div class="text" id="p1015">The left common carotid artery may arise from the brachiocephalic trunk, when it is known as a bovine arch (7%), although this does not represent the morphology seen in bovines. Rarely the left common carotid and subclavian arteries may arise from a left brachiocephalic trunk or from the right common carotid artery, with the right subclavian artery arising separately (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib3" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Akgun et al 2016</a>). The right common carotid and subclavian arteries may arise separately, in which case the right subclavian artery often branches from the left part of the aortic arch distal to the left subclavian artery, and usually passes posterior to the oesophagus as an aberrant right subclavian artery (sometimes referred to as a lusoria artery). A diverticular outpouching (diverticulum of Kommerell) may be present at the origin of an aberrant left or right subclavian artery from a right or left aortic arch, respectively (see <a href="../B9780702077050000586/B9780702077050000586.xhtml#f0035">Fig. 58.6</a>). It can become aneurysmal and cause fatal haemorrhage during endoscopy and can form a vascular ring around the oesophagus and trachea, presenting in the neonate as a feeding disorder with failure to thrive.</div><div class="text" id="p1020">Rare avian forms of branching have been reported. For example, the right common carotid and right subclavian arteries arise from the aortic arch, and the left common carotid and left subclavian arteries arise from the descending aorta (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib3" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Akgun et al 2016</a>). Alternatively, two common arterial trunks arise from the aortic arch, the right trunk branching into the left and right common carotid arteries, and the left trunk branching into the left and right subclavian arteries. Another rare order of the branching from the aortic arch is (from right to left): the right subclavian artery, left subclavian artery, followed by the right common carotid, and left common carotid arteries, with the latter two arising close together and almost forming a common carotid trunk.</div><div class="text" id="p1025">The aortic arch may curve posterior to the oesophagus and trachea, instead of passing anteriorly, and may show variation in its branching. For example, another rare avian form reported is with both carotid arteries originating from the same common trunk, and a left subclavian artery originating from the arch, while the right subclavian artery arises from the descending thoracic aorta. One or more of the ductus arteriosi may remain patent.</div><div class="text" id="p1030">Very rarely, the external and internal carotid arteries arise separately from the aortic arch and the common carotid artery is absent on one or both sides, or both carotid arteries and one or both vertebral arteries can be separate branches. When a right aortic arch and aorta occur, the arrangement of its three branches is reversed and the common carotid arteries may have a single trunk. Other arteries may branch from it; most commonly, these are one or both bronchial arteries and the thyroidea ima artery.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s0735"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0595">Pneumomediastinum and aortic nipple</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1035">Pneumomediastinum is an overarching term that describes the presence of air in the mediastinum. It may arise from a wide range of pathological conditions or physiological states, e.g. penetrating trauma, ruptured major airways or oesophagus, hyperventilation or distressed ventilation such as acute asthma, periparturition or diabetic ketoacidosis.</div><div class="text" id="p1040">The aortic nipple is the radiographic term used to describe a lateral nipple-like projection located on the aortic knuckle. It corresponds to the end-on appearance of the left superior intercostal vein coursing anteriorly and is not observed in all individuals. It may be mistaken radiologically for lymphadenopathy or an intrapulmonary nodule or neoplasm. Despite their relative independence, the aortic nipple is defined by new contours in cases of pneumomediastinum, taking on an ‘inverted aortic nipple’ appearance (see <a href="../B9780702077050000586/B9780702077050000586.xhtml#f0030">Fig. 58.5</a>). In this position, the inverted aortic nipple may facilitate radiographic discrimination of pneumomediastinum from similar conditions. The presence of an aortic nipple has also been shown to precede pathological conditions such as venous obstruction in the superior and inferior vena cavae or left brachiocephalic vein, and has been identified in conditions where venous flow through the left superior intercostal vein is increased (e.g. portal venous hypertension and certain congenital venous anomalies).</div></section><section><a id="s0740"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0600">Coarctation of the thoracic aorta</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1045">The aortic lumen is occasionally partly or completely obliterated, either above (preductal or infantile type), opposite or just beyond (postductal or adult type), the entry of the ductus arteriosus. In the preductal type, the length of coarctation is variable, aortic arch hypoplasia is common, and the left subclavian and even the brachiocephalic trunk may be involved. Severe forms of infantile coarctation and its extreme form (aortic interruption) may be patent ductus arteriosus-dependent, as there is no time for effective collateral circulation to develop. Prostaglandin infusion prior to transfer, and surgery at a tertiary centre, often provide a good mid- to long-term outlook for such infants.</div><div class="text" id="p1050">The postductal type of coarctation has been attributed to abnormal extension of tissue of the ductus arteriosus into the aortic wall, stenosing both vessels as the duct contracts after birth. This form may permit years of normal life, allowing the development of an extensive collateral circulation to the aorta distal to the stenosis (see <a href="../B9780702077050000586/B9780702077050000586.xhtml#f0040">Figs 58.7</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000586/B9780702077050000586.xhtml#f0045">58.8</a>). High vascularity of the thoracic wall is important and clinically characteristic. Many arteries that arise indirectly from the aorta proximal to the region of coarctation anastomose with vessels that are connected to the aorta distal to the region of coarctation; these vessels form a bypass route and become greatly enlarged. Thus, in the thoracic wall, the thoraco-acromial, lateral thoracic and subscapular arteries (from the axillary artery), the suprascapular artery (from the subclavian artery) and the supreme intercostal artery (from the costocervical trunk) anastomose with other posterior intercostal arteries and the internal thoracic artery and its terminal branches (e.g. the musculophrenic artery) anastomose with many of the posterior intercostal arteries and the inferior epigastric arteries (from the external iliac artery). Posterior intercostal arteries are always involved, and enlargement of their dorsal branches may eventually groove (notch) the inferior margins of the ribs. The radiographic shadow of an enlarged left subclavian artery is also increased. Enlargement of the scapular vessels and anastomoses may lead to widespread interscapular pulsation which is palpated easily with the palm of the hand, and is sometimes heard on auscultation.</div></section><section><a id="s0745"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0605">Aortic aneurysm formation</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1055">Degeneration of the aortic tunica media and intimal dissection play a major role in the pathogenesis of aneurysms affecting the ascending aorta and aortic arch. Smooth muscle cells are lost and elastic fibres degenerate, producing cystic spaces in the media that then fill with mucoid material. The loss of these structural cells leads to weakening of the wall with progressive dilation. Ageing and hypertension are major predisposing factors to cystic medial degeneration and there is a strong link with cigarette smoking. Thoracic aortic aneurysms are categorized by their location. A particular pattern of aortic root involvement, anulo-aortic ectasia, is seen in Marfan syndrome (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib12" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_12">Baliga et al 2007</a>). Descending aortic aneurysms are generally caused by atherosclerosis (90%) and the remainder result from mycotic disease or trauma.</div><div class="text" id="p1060">Associations also exist between thoracic aortic aneurysm and other connective tissue diseases such as homocysteinuria and Ehlers–Danlos syndrome. A genetic relation is seen in familial thoracic aortic aneurysm syndrome (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib12" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Baliga et al 2007</a>). Rarely, aneurysms may occur as a result of Takayasu’s arteritis, or infections within the aortic wall. Some aortic aneurysms are incidental findings on chest films or CT studies. Symptomatic cases present with breathlessness, unbearable chest and back pain, hoarse voice, cough and haemoptysis. Early diastolic murmurs caused by aortic regurgitation may be audible. Repair is carried out in patients with symptoms or fusiform dilation measuring more than 5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm in diameter. Aneurysms may also occur in an aberrant right subclavian artery and may involve the diverticulum of Kommerell, leading to dysphagia and even tracheal compression. Inadvertent rupture may occur during endoscopy because of the retro-oesophageal location.</div></section><section><a id="s0750"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0610">Aortic dissection</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1065">Aortic dissection occurs as a result of degeneration of the tunica media of the aortic wall and is associated with senescence, persistent hypertension or collagen vascular diseases such as Marfan syndrome. Many patients with aortic dissection have a pre-existing aneurysm. Other associations include aortic coarctation, Turner’s syndrome, cocaine abuse (&lt;1%) and trauma during surgical procedures. There is a higher prevalence in males than females, but after 75 years of age there is no sex difference in prevalence (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib12" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Baliga et al 2007</a>). In a classic aortic dissection, an intimal tear may occur, producing a split into the tunica media that creates a false lumen (see <a href="../B9780702077050000586/B9780702077050000586.xhtml#f0050">Fig. 58.9</a>). If another tear occurs, connection can be made once again with the true lumen (double-barrel aorta). Additional aetiopathologies include penetrating atherosclerotic ulceration, where an atherosclerotic plaque ruptures into the aortic tunica media, and aortic intramural haematoma, where the vasa vasorum haemorrhage into the wall of the aorta (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib12" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Baliga et al 2007</a>).<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E74" id="pagebreak_1.464E74"></span><a id="pg1464.e72"/></div><div class="text" id="p1070">Aortic dissections are classified as types I, II, IIIa and IIIb (DeBakey classification), or types A and B (Stanford classification). Dissections that include the aorta proximal to the left subclavian artery, with or without distal extension, are classified as type I, II or A. Type I involves up to the entire aorta (ascending, arch and descending), whereas type II involves the ascending aorta only. Dissections that are distal to the left subclavian artery are classified as type IIIa (extend to the respiratory diaphragm), IIIb (extend below the respiratory diaphragm) or B. These cases present acutely with severe retrosternal, neck or interscapular chest pain. Depending on the extent of the dissection, they may be associated with neurological signs, diarrhoea or leg weakness. Extension into the pericardium causes cardiac tamponade and circulatory collapse. Diagnosis is established by echocardiography and on contrast-enhanced CT or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Medical management is possible for descending aortic dissections, while surgical repair is essential for ascending aortic or aortic arch dissection.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0755"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0615">Para-aortic bodies</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1075">Para-aortic bodies (aortopulmonary paraganglia) belong to the branchiomeric category of paraganglia. They are chemoreceptors and respond to changes in arterial gas concentrations such as lowered pO<sub>2</sub>, increased pCO<sub>2</sub> and increased hydrogen ion concentration. These microscopic structures occur in several locations within the thorax. Coronary paraganglia lie between the ascending aorta and pulmonary trunk, either anteriorly or posteriorly, adjacent to the proximal aorta (aortic root); pulmonary paraganglia lie in the groove between the ductus arteriosus and the pulmonary trunk; subclavian–supra-aortic paraganglia lie between either the right subclavian and right common carotid arteries, or the left subclavian and left common carotid arteries, or caudal to the left subclavian artery, adjacent to the aortic arch.</div><div class="text" id="p1080">Rarely, tumours may arise within the para-aortic bodies (e.g. mediastinal paragangliomas that originate in the pulmonary trunk and aortic arch). Generally, these tumours are asymptomatic and are discovered incidentally, but they may occasionally lead to feelings of pressure and hoarseness (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib258" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_258">Rooke et al 2007</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p1085">The major blood vessels of the thorax include the pulmonary trunk, the thoracic aorta and its branches, and the superior and inferior venae cavae and their tributaries (see <a href="../B9780702077050000586/B9780702077050000586.xhtml#f0010">Fig. 58.1</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0760"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0620">Brachiocephalic trunk</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1090">The brachiocephalic (innominate) trunk, the largest diameter branch of the aortic arch, is 4–5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm in length (see <a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0130">Figs 57.4A</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000574/B9780702077050000574.xhtml#f0130">B</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000586/B9780702077050000586.xhtml#f0010">58.1</a>). It arises from the convexity of the aortic arch posterior to the centre of the manubrium sterni, and ascends posterolaterally to the right, initially located anterior to the trachea, then on its right. It divides into the right common carotid and right subclavian arteries level with the superior border of the right sternoclavicular joint. The brachiocephalic trunk and left common carotid artery may share a common origin (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib218" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_218">Osborn 1998</a>). A thymic, bronchial or thyroidea ima artery can arise from the brachiocephalic trunk (see <a href="../B9780702077050000586/B9780702077050000586.xhtml#f0010">Fig. 58.1</a>). The thyroidea ima artery is a small and inconstant artery that may also arise from the aortic arch, common carotid, subclavian, pericardiacophrenic or internal thoracic arteries; most commonly it arises from right-sided vessels (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib310" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_310">Tunali 2016</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib328" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_328">Yalcin 2016</a>) and ascends on the trachea to the thyroid isthmus, where it terminates.</div><section><a id="s0765"/><section><a id="s0770"/><section><a id="s0775"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle0625">Relations</p><div class="textfl" id="p1095">The anterior surface of the brachiocephalic trunk is separated from the manubrium by sternohyoid and sternothyroid, thymic remnants, the left brachiocephalic and right inferior thyroid veins (crossing its root), and sometimes by the right cardiac branches of the vagus nerve. Posterior relations are the trachea (inferiorly) and the right mediastinal part of the parietal pleura (superiorly). The right vagus nerve is posterolateral (superiorly) and sits lateral to the trachea (inferiorly) (see <a href="../B9780702077050000562/B9780702077050000562.xhtml#f0035">Fig. 56.7</a>). On its right side are the right brachiocephalic vein and the upper part of the superior vena cava and mediastinal part of the parietal pleura, and on its left side are thymic remnants, the origin of the left common carotid artery, the inferior thyroid veins and the trachea (superiorly).</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s9000"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0630">Left common carotid artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p9025">The left common carotid artery originates directly from the aortic arch immediately posterolateral to the brachiocephalic trunk and therefore has both thoracic and cervical parts. Its course and relations are described on <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811.xhtml">page 1464.e56</a>.</div></section><section><a id="s9010"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle90630">Left subclavian artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p9030">In the majority of individuals, the left subclavian artery originates independently from the aortic arch after the origins of the brachiocephalic and left common carotid arteries. Its course and relations are described on <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_split_a.xhtml#pg1464.e83">page 1464.83</a>.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0785"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle99630">Descending thoracic aorta</h4><div class="textfl" id="p1100">The descending thoracic aorta is located within the posterior mediastinum (see <a href="../B9780702077050000525/B9780702077050000525.xhtml#f0020">Figs 52.3</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000562/B9780702077050000562.xhtml#f0010">56.1</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000562/B9780702077050000562.xhtml#f0030">56.6</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000562/B9780702077050000562.xhtml#f0035">56.7B</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000562/B9780702077050000562.xhtml#f0060">56.13</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000562/B9780702077050000562.xhtml#f0065">56.14A</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000562/B9780702077050000562.xhtml#f0095">56.20D</a>–E). It is continuous with the aortic arch, beginning level with the lower border of the body of the fourth thoracic vertebra (typically at the sternal plane, although the level of the plane may vary), and ending anterior to the lower border of the body of the twelfth thoracic vertebra at the aortic hiatus, through which it passes. It is left of the vertebral column at its origin, and reaches the midline, anterior to the vertebral bodies, as it descends.</div><section><a id="s0790"/><section><a id="s0795"/><section><a id="s0800"/><section><a id="s0805"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle0635">Relations</p><div class="textfl" id="p1105">Anterior to the descending thoracic aorta, from superior to inferior, are the hilum of the left lung, the pericardium separating it from the left atrium, oesophagus and the lumbar part of the respiratory diaphragm. The vertebral column and accessory hemiazygos (superiorly) and hemiazygos (inferiorly) veins are posterior. To the right is the thoracic duct and the azygos vein, and inferiorly, to both the left and right sides, are the pleura-covered parts of the mediastinal surfaces of the respective lungs. The oesophagus with its associated plexus of nerves is closely related to the descending thoracic aorta; it is located to the right of the descending aorta in the upper thorax, anterior to it in the lower thorax, and anterolaterally to the left at the level of the diaphragm. Occasionally the aorta traverses the diaphragm to the left and posterior to the oesophagus (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib20" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_20">Berdjas and Turina 2011</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p1110">The descending thoracic aorta provides visceral branches to the pericardium, lungs, bronchi and oesophagus, and parietal branches to the thoracic wall and vertebral column.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s0810"/><h5 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0640">Pericardial branches</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1115">A variable number of small vessels are distributed to the posterior aspect of the pericardium.</div></section><section><a id="s0815"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0645">Bronchial arteries</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1120">Bronchial arteries vary in number, size and origin. There is usually only one right bronchial artery that arises from either the right third posterior intercostal artery, or the superior left bronchial artery, or various right posterior intercostal arteries, and runs posteriorly on the right principal main bronchus. The left bronchial arteries, usually two, arise from the thoracic aorta, the superior near the fifth thoracic vertebra, the inferior below the left principal main bronchus, and run posterior to the left main bronchus. The bronchial arteries supply the pulmonary areolar tissue, bronchopulmonary lymph nodes, pericardium and oesophagus.</div></section><section><a id="s0820"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0650">Oesophageal branches</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1125">Two or three bronchial arteries supply the thoracic oesophagus. Two or three oesophageal arteries that arise either anteriorly or from the right side of the descending thoracic aorta supply the distal oesophagus (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib209" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_209">Norton et al 2008</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0825"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0655">Mediastinal branches</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1130">Numerous small vessels supply lymph nodes and areolar tissue in the posterior mediastinum.</div></section><section><a id="s0830"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0660">Superior phrenic branches</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1135">Superior phrenic arteries arise from the distal descending thoracic aorta and are distributed posteriorly to the superior (thoracic) surface of the respiratory diaphragm, anastomosing with the musculophrenic and pericardiacophrenic arteries (see <a href="../B9780702077050000550/B9780702077050000550.xhtml#f0050">Fig. 55.6</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0835"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0665">Posterior intercostal arteries</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1140">There are usually nine pairs of posterior intercostal arteries. They arise from the posterior aspect of the descending thoracic aorta and are distributed to the lower nine intercostal spaces (third to eleventh spaces). The right posterior intercostal arteries are longer because the aorta deviates to the left (see <a href="../B9780702077050000537/B9780702077050000537.xhtml#f0075">Fig. 53.18</a>): they cross the vertebral bodies posterior to the oesophagus, thoracic duct and azygos vein, and the parietal pleura covering the right lung. The left posterior intercostal arteries travel posteriorly across the vertebral bodies and are in contact with the parietal pleura covering the left lung; the first and second are crossed by the left superior intercostal vein, and those located inferiorly are crossed by the hemiazygos and accessory hemiazygos veins. The sympathetic trunk and ganglia lie anterior to all of the arteries, and the thoracic splanchnic nerves are anterior to the more inferiorly located arteries.</div><div class="text" id="p1145">Each artery crosses its intercostal space obliquely towards the angle of the rib above and continues forwards in its costal groove. It runs between the costal parietal pleura and associated endothoracic fascia, and the internal intercostal membrane as far as the angle of the rib, then passes between the internal and innermost intercostal muscles (see <a href="../B9780702077050000537/B9780702077050000537.xhtml#f0070">Fig. 53.17</a>) and anastomoses with an anterior intercostal branch from <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E75" id="pagebreak_1.464E75"></span><a id="pg1464.e73"/>either the internal thoracic or musculophrenic artery. Each artery is accompanied by a vein above and a nerve below, except in the upper spaces, where the nerve is initially superior to the artery. The third posterior intercostal artery anastomoses with the supreme intercostal artery and may provide the major supply to the second intercostal space. The inferior two posterior intercostal arteries continue anteriorly into the abdominal wall, where they anastomose with the subcostal, superior epigastric and lumbar arteries (see <a href="../B9780702077050000525/B9780702077050000525.xhtml#f0020">Fig. 52.3</a>). Each posterior intercostal artery has dorsal, collateral, muscular and cutaneous branches (see <a href="../B9780702077050000537/B9780702077050000537.xhtml#f0075">Fig. 53.18</a>).</div><section><a id="s0840"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0670">Dorsal branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p1150">Each dorsal branch passes posteriorly in the space between the necks of adjacent ribs (superiorly and inferiorly), the adjacent vertebral body (medially) and the superior costotransverse ligament (laterally) (see <a href="../B9780702077050000537/B9780702077050000537.xhtml#f0050">Fig. 53.11</a>). Each dorsal branch gives off a spinal branch that enters the vertebral canal via the intervertebral foramen and supplies the vertebra, spinal cord and meninges, anastomosing with the spinal arteries located immediately superior, inferior, and contralateral (see <a href="../B9780702077050000537/B9780702077050000537.xhtml#f0075">Fig. 53.18</a>). It then divides into a medial and a lateral dorsal musculocutaneous branch; occasionally, these arise separately from the posterior intercostal artery rather than from a common trunk. The medial branch crosses the transverse process of a vertebra with the medial dorsal branch of a thoracic spinal nerve to supply spinalis, longissimus thoracis and an area of overlying skin. The lateral branch supplies longissimus thoracis and iliocostalis, and the medial aspects of latissimus dorsi and trapezius, in addition to an area of overlying skin.</div></section><section><a id="s0845"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0675">Collateral intercostal branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p1155">A collateral intercostal branch arises near the angle of a rib and descends to the upper border of the subjacent rib, along which it courses to anastomose with its partner branch from the anterior intercostal branch of the internal thoracic or musculophrenic artery.</div></section><section><a id="s0850"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0680">Muscular branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p1160">Muscular branches supply the intercostal and pectoral muscles and serratus anterior, and anastomose with the superior and lateral thoracic branches of the axillary artery. Mammary branches from the anterior intercostal vessels in the second to fourth spaces supply the pectoral muscles, breast tissue and covering skin, and enlarge during lactation.</div></section><section><a id="s0855"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0685">Lateral cutaneous branch</p><div class="textfl" id="p1165">The lateral cutaneous branch arises in the posterior part of the intercostal space and travels anteriorly for a few centimetres with an accompanying vein and the lateral cutaneous branch of the accompanying intercostal nerve (see <a href="../B9780702077050000537/B9780702077050000537.xhtml#f0080">Fig. 53.21</a>). This neurovascular bundle pierces the intercostal muscles and passes slightly inferiorly to emerge between the interdigitations of serratus anterior and external abdominal oblique. It divides into anterior and posterior rami that contribute to the blood supply of the skin of the lateral trunk; these vessels are less significant in the upper three intercostal spaces.</div></section><section><a id="s0860"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0690">Unnamed branches</p><div class="textfl" id="p1170">Unnamed branches supply tissues of the thoracic wall, including the costal periosteum, bone and bone marrow of the ribs, tissues of the synovial and synarthrodial joints, and the parietal pleura and tissues of the extrapleural space.</div></section><section><a id="s0865"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0695">Clinical significance of the posterior intercostal arteries</p><div class="textfl" id="p1175">Catheter embolization is an interventional radiology technique that can be used to block branches of the posterior intercostal arteries when they are bleeding, e.g. secondary to blunt trauma usually associated with rib fractures, or when there is an abnormality of the vertebrae supplied by the dorsal branch of the posterior intercostal artery. In such cases, the posterior intercostal artery may be accessed by placing a catheter in the thoracic aorta, usually by puncturing the femoral artery in the femoral triangle. A smaller catheter (referred to as a superselective catheter) may then be placed in the posterior intercostal artery and embolic material (metallic coils or glue) is injected to block the artery. This can cause cessation of bleeding in cases of trauma and provide pain relief when, for example, the vertebral body is infiltrated with tumour (see <a href="../B9780702077050000537/B9780702077050000537.xhtml#f0155">Fig. 53.20</a>).</div></section></section><section><a id="s0870"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0700">Subcostal arteries</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1180">The subcostal arteries are the last paired branches of the descending thoracic aorta, in series with the posterior intercostal arteries and inferior to the twelfth ribs. Each runs laterally anterior to the body of the twelfth thoracic vertebra and posterior to the thoracic splanchnic nerves, sympathetic trunk, costal part of the parietal pleura and lumbar part of the respiratory diaphragm. The right subcostal artery is also posterior to the thoracic duct and azygos vein, while the left is posterior to the hemiazygos vein. Each artery enters the abdomen at the lower border of the twelfth rib, accompanied by the twelfth thoracic (subcostal) nerve, lying posterior to the lateral arcuate ligament and kidney, and anterior to quadratus lumborum. The right artery courses posterior to the ascending colon, and the left courses posterior to the descending colon. The subcostal arteries pierce the aponeurosis of transversus abdominis to become more superficial, and continue toward the anterior midline in the plane between transversus abdominis and internal abdominal oblique; they anastomose with the superior epigastric, lower posterior intercostal and lumbar arteries. Each has a dorsal branch, distributed like those of the posterior intercostal arteries.</div></section><section><a id="s0875"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0705">Aberrant artery (right dorsal aorta vestige)</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1185">A small artery sometimes leaves the descending thoracic aorta from its right side near the origin of the right bronchial artery. It ascends to the right behind the trachea and oesophagus and may anastomose with the right supreme intercostal artery.</div></section><section><a id="s0880"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0710">Aortic rupture in trauma</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1190">Rupture of the ascending aorta is usually associated with a high immediate mortality (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib12" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Baliga et al 2007</a>). Blunt aortic rupture commonly occurs in road traffic accidents and has a 20% survival rate. There is usually a transverse tear involving the tunica intima and tunica media of the aortic wall; systemic circulatory pressure may cause the formation of a false aneurysm. Rupture of the isthmus region of the descending thoracic aorta is more common, probably because it marks the junction between the mobile and fixed parts of the aorta. Other sites include the ascending aorta proximal to the origin of the brachiocephalic trunk, the aortic arch and the abdominal aorta. Rupture is likely to be the result of a number of factors, including torsion, shear and stretching forces, possibly compounded by hydrostatic pressure.</div></section><section><a id="s0885"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0715">Aortic atherosclerosis or calcification</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1195">Echocardiography, particularly transoesophageal, allows detailed assessment of proximal aortic atherosclerosis implicated in systemic embolic events and strokes, and the extent of turbulent flow. MRI can allow accurate assessment of the composition and size of atherosclerotic plaques and flow dynamics, permitting assessment of the risk of plaque rupture and thrombus formation.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s7695"/><h4 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0720">Abdominal aorta</h4><div class="textfl" id="p1200">The abdominal aorta begins at the aortic hiatus of the respiratory diaphragm anterior to the twelfth thoracic vertebra. It descends anterior to the lumbar vertebrae and bifurcates into two common iliac arteries anterior to the fourth lumbar vertebra or the intervertebral disc between the fourth and fifth lumbar vertebrae, slightly to the left of the midline (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib188" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_188">Mirjalili et al 2012a</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib189" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_189">2012b</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib198" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_198">Moussallem et al 2012</a>) (see <a href="../B9780702077050000616/B9780702077050000616.xhtml#f0030">Figs 61.8</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000616/B9780702077050000616.xhtml#f0040">61.11</a>). The angle of bifurcation is very variable (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib198" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Moussallem et al 2012</a>). The mean adult diameter of the aorta inferior to the origin of the renal arteries measured by computed tomography is 19–21<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm (males) and 16–18<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm (females) (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib256" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_256">Rogers et al 2013</a>), but there are ethnic variations (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib132" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_132">Jasper et al 2014</a>). Measured by ultrasound, equivalent values are 20± 2.5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm (males) and 17±1.5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm (females) (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib205" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_205">Needleman 2006</a>). The mean calibre of the abdominal aorta decreases slightly from proximal to distal. With advancing age, there is a progressive increase in abdominal aortic diameter in both sexes and the tapering becomes more pronounced (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib90" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_90">Fleischmann et al 2001</a>). In the elderly, the abdominal aorta frequently becomes ectatic and tortuous, changing the angle and position of the bifurcation and rotating the origins of the major branches.</div><div class="text" id="p1205">Approximately 80% of abdominal aortic aneurysms occur in the aorta inferior to the origin of the renal arteries. Males with atherosclerosis are most at risk of developing the condition, particularly from the sixth decade onwards (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib292" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_292">Takayama and Yamanouchi 2013</a>). The high mortality risk from spontaneous rupture has prompted the development of ultrasound screening programmes to detect aneurysms and repair them electively. Overall, surgery is performed in patients with an aneurysm greater than 5.0<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm in diameter (females) and 5.5<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm (males) (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib103" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_103">Groeneveld et al 2018</a>). Repair is most commonly performed by open surgery or endovascular stenting (endovascular aneurysm repair).</div><section><a id="s0895"/><section><a id="s0900"/><section><a id="s0905"/><section><a id="s0910"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle0725">Relations</p><div class="textfl" id="p1210">The proximal abdominal aorta is directly related anteriorly to the coeliac trunk and its branches, autonomic nerve plexuses and lymphatics. Inferior to the coeliac trunk, the superior mesenteric artery leaves the aorta and descends anterior to the left renal vein. The body of the pancreas is anterior to these vessels; the splenic vein is on its posterior surface and extends obliquely up and to the left. Further <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E76" id="pagebreak_1.464E76"></span><a id="pg1464.e74"/>anteriorly, the omental bursa separates the proximal abdominal aorta from the lesser omentum, stomach and left lobe of the liver. Inferior to the pancreas, the horizontal third part of the duodenum crosses the aorta anteriorly.</div><div class="text" id="p1215">The twelfth thoracic vertebra, the upper four lumbar vertebrae, intervening intervertebral discs and the anterior longitudinal ligament lie posterior to the abdominal aorta. Lumbar arteries arise from its dorsal aspect, and the third and fourth (and sometimes the second) left lumbar veins cross posterior to it to reach the inferior vena cava. The abdominal aorta can overlap the medial border of psoas major on the left.</div><div class="text" id="p1220">On the right, the abdominal aorta is related superiorly to the cisterna chyli and thoracic duct, the azygos vein and the right crus of the respiratory diaphragm, which overlaps and separates it from the inferior vena cava and right coeliac ganglion. Below the second lumbar vertebra it is closely applied to the left side of the inferior vena cava. This close relationship allows a fistula to develop between the aorta and adjacent inferior vena cava, a rare complication of aneurysmal disease or trauma. On the left, the aorta is related superiorly to the left crus of the respiratory diaphragm and left coeliac ganglion. Level with the second lumbar vertebra, it is related to the ascending part of the duodenum, the left sympathetic trunk and the inferior mesenteric vein.</div><div class="text" id="p1225">The branches of the abdominal aorta are described as anterior, lateral and dorsal (see <a href="../B9780702077050000616/B9780702077050000616.xhtml#f0035">Fig. 61.9</a>). The anterior (unpaired) branches are the coeliac trunk and superior and inferior mesenteric arteries and the lateral (paired) branches are the inferior phrenic, middle suprarenal, renal and gonadal (ovarian or testicular) arteries: both groups are distributed to the viscera. The dorsal branches are the lumbar and median sacral arteries which supply the body wall, vertebral column and the vertebral canal and its contents.</div></section></section></section></section><section><a id="s0915"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0730">Coeliac trunk</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1230">The coeliac trunk is the first anterior branch and arises just inferior to the aortic hiatus, usually at the level of the vertebral body of the twelfth thoracic vertebra. It is 1–3<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm long and passes almost horizontally anteriorly and slightly to the right superior to the body of the pancreas and splenic vein. In most individuals it trifurcates into the left gastric, common hepatic and splenic arteries. Variations occur and include a separate origin of the left gastric artery from the abdominal aorta, one or both inferior phrenic arteries arising from the coeliac trunk, and the superior mesenteric artery or one or more of its branches arising in common with the coeliac trunk (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib224" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_224">Panagouli et al 2013</a>). Anterior to the coeliac trunk lies the omental bursa. The coeliac plexus surrounds the coeliac trunk, sending extensions along its branches. On the right lie the right coeliac ganglion, right crus of the respiratory diaphragm and the caudate lobe of the liver. To the left lie the left coeliac ganglion, left crus of the respiratory diaphragm and the cardia of the stomach. Rarely the coeliac trunk can be compressed by the median arcuate ligament (Dunbar’s syndrome), resulting in visceral ischaemia and abdominal pain (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib120" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_120">Ho et al 2017</a>).</div><section><a id="s0920"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0735">Left gastric artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1235">The left gastric artery is the smallest branch of the coeliac trunk. It ascends to the left of the midline and crosses over the distal end of the left crus of the respiratory diaphragm beneath a fold of peritoneum in the upper posterior wall of the omental bursa (the gastropancreatic fold). Here, it lies adjacent to the left inferior phrenic artery and medial or anterior to the left suprarenal gland. It runs forwards into the superior portion of the lesser omentum adjacent to the proximal end of the lesser curvature, and then it turns anteroinferiorly to run along the lesser curvature between the two peritoneal leaves of the lesser omentum. At the highest point of its course it gives off one or more oesophageal branches. In its course along the lesser curvature it gives off multiple branches that run on to the anterior and posterior surfaces of the stomach, after which it anastomoses with the right gastric artery in the region of the angular incisure.</div><div class="text" id="p1240">Rarely the left gastric artery (replaced or accessory) arises from the common hepatic or left hepatic arteries, or directly from the abdominal aorta (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib224" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Panagouli et al 2013</a>). The most common of these variations is an origin from the left hepatic artery, when the left gastric artery passes between the peritoneal layers of the proximal lesser omentum to reach the lesser curvature of the stomach. However, a replaced/accessory left hepatic artery arising from the left gastric artery is more common than a replaced/accessory left gastric artery origin.</div></section><section><a id="s0925"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0740">Hepatic artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1245">During fetal and early postnatal life the common hepatic artery is the largest branch of the coeliac trunk, whereas in adults it is intermediate in size between the left gastric and splenic arteries. The common hepatic artery gives off the right gastric and gastroduodenal arteries (see <a href="../B9780702077050000665/B9780702077050000665.xhtml#f0085">Fig. 66.9A</a>). After originating from the coeliac trunk, it passes anteriorly and laterally, above the superior border of the pancreas, to the superior aspect of the first part of the duodenum. It is subdivided into the common hepatic artery, from the coeliac trunk to the origin of the gastroduodenal artery, and the proper hepatic artery, from that point to its bifurcation. Both parts ascend anterior to the hepatic portal vein and medial to the bile duct within the free margin of the hepatoduodenal ligament in the anterior wall of the omental foramen. The left and right hepatic arteries arise at a variable level below the porta hepatis. The right hepatic artery typically crosses posterior (occasionally anterior) to the common hepatic duct (see <a href="../B9780702077050000665/B9780702077050000665.xhtml#f0085">Fig. 66.9B</a>). Its usual course is toward the common hepatic duct: it bends inferiorly before crossing posterior to the duct and then bends back up toward the right hepatic duct lateral to the common hepatic duct and hepatic portal vein. Its close proximity to the bifurcation of the bile duct means that it is often involved or encased by bile duct cancers that arise at the bifurcation (hilar cholangiocarcinoma): the right hepatic artery is more frequently involved than the left hepatic artery in bile duct cancers of the porta hepatis. Occasionally the right hepatic artery crosses anterior to the common hepatic duct and is more vulnerable to injury during biliary surgery. It almost always divides into an anterior branch supplying segments V and VIII and a posterior branch supplying segments VI and VII. The anterior division also often supplies a branch to segment I and the gallbladder. The proper hepatic artery sometimes divides at a more inferior level close to its origin, and occasionally it divides at a superior level, well to the left of the porta hepatis. The main significance of an early division is that the right hepatic artery can pass posterior to the hepatic portal vein (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib158" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_158">Launois and Jamieson 1993</a>). The segmental arteries of the liver are macroscopically end arteries, although some collateral circulation occurs between segments via fine terminal branches.</div><div class="text" id="p1250">Anatomical variants of the normal arrangement of the hepatic arteries are found in about one-third of individuals and are important to recognize because they are relevant to surgical and interventional radiological procedures (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib183" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_183">Michels 1966</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib61" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_61">Covey et al 2002</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib164" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_164">López-Andújar et al 2007</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib264" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_264">Saba and Mallarini 2011</a>). An artery that supplies a part of the liver in addition to the normal artery supplying that part is defined as an accessory artery. A replaced hepatic artery is an artery that does not originate from an orthodox position and provides the sole supply to that part of the liver.</div><div class="text" id="p1255">A replaced proper hepatic artery can arise from the superior mesenteric artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000665/B9780702077050000665.xhtml#f0090">Fig. 66.10</a>) and can be suspected at surgery by a relatively superficial hepatic portal vein (reflecting the absence of a hepatic artery that would normally ascend in front of the vein). More commonly, a replaced or accessory right hepatic artery arises from the superior mesenteric artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000665/B9780702077050000665.xhtml#f0090">Figs 66.10</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000665/B9780702077050000665.xhtml#f0095">66.11</a>). In such cases, the variant artery runs in the lesser omentum posterior to the hepatic portal vein and bile duct and can usually be identified at surgery by palpable pulsation posterior to the hepatic portal vein. An accessory right hepatic artery can be injured during resection of the pancreatic head because it lies close to the hepatic portal vein. Occasionally a replaced or accessory left hepatic artery arises from the left gastric artery, entering the liver through the umbilical fissure; this artery provides a source of collateral supply in cases where the arteries at the porta hepatis are occluded, but it can also be injured during mobilization of the stomach as it lies in the superior portion of the lesser omentum. Rarely an accessory left or right hepatic artery arises from the gastroduodenal artery or directly from the aorta. The presence of replaced arteries can be life-saving in patients with bile duct cancer; because they are further away from the bile duct they tend to be spared from infiltration by the cancer, making excision of the tumour feasible. Knowledge of these variations is also essential when whole and split liver transplantation is performed, and their presence often requires reconstruction.</div><div class="text" id="p1260">The most common anatomical variants are a replaced or accessory left hepatic artery that arises from the left gastric artery, or a replaced or accessory right hepatic artery that arises from the superior mesenteric artery, both occurring in 10–20% of individuals.</div><div class="text" id="p1265">Variations in the intrahepatic arteries are common and can be important surgically. For example, the segment IV artery most commonly arises from the left hepatic artery, but in up to 30% of cases it arises from the right hepatic artery or the proper hepatic artery (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib217" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_217">Onishi et al 2000</a>). The segment IV artery never arises to the right of the common hepatic duct, which means that if the right hepatic artery is divided to the right of the common hepatic duct, the arterial supply to segment IV is not endangered. Failure to recognize this variation can compromise the blood supply to segment IV following right hepatectomy, and it is especially important during right liver donation for live donor liver transplantation.<span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E77" id="pagebreak_1.464E77"></span><a id="pg1464.e75"/></div><section><a id="s0930"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0745">Right gastric artery</p><div class="textfl" id="p1270">The right gastric artery is a relatively small artery that usually arises from the proper hepatic artery and runs forwards into the lesser omentum just above the superior part of the duodenum. It then travels within the lesser omentum along the lesser curvature of the stomach, giving off multiple branches to the anterior and posterior surfaces of the stomach, before anastomosing with the left gastric artery. Less commonly, the right gastric artery arises from the common hepatic, left hepatic or gastroduodenal arteries (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib309" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_309">Tubbs et al 2016</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0935"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0750">Gastroduodenal artery</p><div class="textfl" id="p1275">The gastroduodenal artery usually arises from the common hepatic artery posterior or superior to the superior part of the duodenum. It descends posterior to the retroperitoneal portion of the superior part of the duodenum to the left of the bile duct. At the inferior border of the superior part of the duodenum, it is commonly described as dividing into the right gastro-omental and superior pancreaticoduodenal arteries, but this anatomical arrangement is rare (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib37" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_37">Bradley 1973</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib22" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_22">Bertelli et al 1995</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib23" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_23">Bertelli et al 1996a</a>) and its usual branching pattern is as follows. As it descends posterior to the superior part of the duodenum it usually gives off the posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery, several retroduodenal branches that supply the superior part and the proximal portion of the descending part of the duodenum, and a supraduodenal artery that supplies the anterosuperior part of the proximal duodenum (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib30" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_30">Bianchi and Albanèse 1989</a>). As the gastroduodenal artery emerges inferior to the superior part of the duodenum it usually gives off the right gastro-omental artery and several pyloric branches. It then descends on the anterior surface of the pancreas, where it divides into the anterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery and pancreatic branches. Although the gastroduodenal artery usually branches from the common hepatic artery, it occasionally originates from other sources including the coeliac trunk, the superior mesenteric artery, as a trifurcation with the right and left hepatic arteries, or from the right or left hepatic artery. The gastroduodenal artery or one of its branches can be a source of haemorrhage from a penetrating posterior duodenal ulcer (see above) or a site of aneurysm or pseudoaneurysm formation, and for these reasons, it is an important vessel for interventional radiologists.</div><section><a id="s0940"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle0755">Posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery</p><div class="textfl" id="p1280">The posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery usually arises as the first branch of the gastroduodenal artery at the superior edge of the superior (first) part of the duodenum. It runs to the right, anterior to the supraduodenal segment of the bile duct, before spiralling posteriorly around the pancreatic segment of the bile duct and descending on the posterior surface of the head of the pancreas. It gives branches to the duodenum, head of the pancreas and bile duct before anastomosing with the posterior inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery to form the posterior pancreaticoduodenal arcade. The posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery can also give origin to the retroduodenal and supraduodenal arteries that supply the duodenum (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib23" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Bertelli et al 1996a</a>). The spiral course of the posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery reflects its embryonic development: it is the artery to the anterior aspect of the ventral pancreatic bud and the bile duct that subsequently rotate clockwise posterior to the duodenum and dorsal pancreatic bud (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib25" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_25">Bertelli et al 1997</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0945"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle0760">Anterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery</p><div class="textfl" id="p1285">The anterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery usually arises as the smaller terminal branch of the gastroduodenal artery, together with the right gastro-omental artery. It originates posterior to the superior portion of the duodenum and runs inferiorly on the anterior aspect of the head of the pancreas at a variable distance medial to the groove between the descending duodenum and head of the pancreas. It passes inferiorly around the right or inferior border of the head of the pancreas, often piercing the gland to reach the posterior surface of the uncinate process, where it joins the anterior inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery to form the anterior pancreaticoduodenal arcade (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib22" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Bertelli et al 1995</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s0950"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle0765">Right gastro-omental artery</p><div class="textfl" id="p1290">The right gastro-omental artery usually originates from the gastroduodenal artery behind the superior part of the duodenum, anterior to the head of the pancreas. It passes inferiorly towards the midline just below the pylorus and then runs laterally along the greater curvature between the layers of the greater omentum about 1–2<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm from the greater curvature of the stomach. It ends by anastomosing with the left gastro-omental artery (although this anastomosis is variably developed (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib204" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_204">Ndoye et al 2006</a>) and can be absent). The right gastro-omental artery gives off gastric branches that ascend onto the anterior and posterior surfaces of the pyloric antrum and distal body of the stomach, omental branches that descend into the greater omentum, and duodenal branches that contribute to the supply of the inferior aspect of the superior part of the duodenum. The course of the right gastro-omental artery can vary: it can pass down into the greater omentum before arching back towards the greater curvature; it is important that the surgeon appreciates this anatomical variation if relying on the right gastro-omental artery to supply a surgically fashioned gastric conduit during reconstruction following oesophagectomy.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s0955"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0770">Splenic artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1295">The artery almost always arises from the coeliac trunk, in common with the left gastric and common hepatic arteries. However, it can originate from the common hepatic artery or the left gastric artery, or, rarely, directly from the abdominal aorta either in isolation or as a splenomesenteric trunk (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib309" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Tubbs et al 2016</a>). From its origin, the artery runs a little way inferiorly before turning to the left behind the stomach to run horizontally anterior to the left kidney and left suprarenal gland and behind or above the tail of the pancreas in the splenorenal ligament (see <a href="../B9780702077050000689/B9780702077050000689.xhtml#f0030">Fig. 68.6A</a>). Multiple loops or even coils of the artery appear above the superior border of the pancreas (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib182" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_182">McFee et al 1995</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib226" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_226">Pandey et al 2004</a>). The splenic artery gives off multiple small branches along its course that penetrate and supply the pancreas, including the dorsal pancreatic artery, the great pancreatic artery, arising approximately two-thirds of the way along the gland, and the artery to the tail of the pancreas, arising near the tail. These branches lie on or within the posterior aspect of the gland and often anastomose with the inferior pancreatic artery. Anatomical variations are not unusual, and the dorsal, great or inferior pancreatic arteries can be dominant in any one individual (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib327" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_327">Wu et al 2011</a>). Near its termination, the splenic artery gives off the short gastric arteries and the left gastro-omental artery (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib277" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_277">Skandalakis et al 1993</a>). Additional variant branches include a posterior gastric artery and small retroperitoneal branches.</div><div class="text" id="p1300">The splenic artery is one of the most tortuous arteries in the body (see <a href="../B9780702077050000690/B9780702077050000690.xhtml#f0030">Fig. 69.6</a>). The reason for the tortuosity, which can become more pronounced with advancing age, is not understood, although there have been several proposals (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib58" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_58">Cortés and Pellico 1988</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib94" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_94">García-Porrero and Lemes 1988</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib35" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_35">Borley et al 1995</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib290" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_290">Sylvester et al 1995</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib160" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_160">Liu et al 1996</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib226" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Pandey et al 2004</a>). The artery is 8–32<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm long and its calibre usually exceeds that of the common hepatic and left gastric arteries, which range from 3 to 12<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm. Splenic arterial blood flow is approximately 3<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>ml/sec/100<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>g, corresponding to approximately 7% of cardiac output (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib304" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_304">Trubel et al 1985</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib58" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Cortés and Pellico 1988</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib94" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">García-Porrero and Lemes 1988</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib203" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_203">Nakamura et al 1989</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib277" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Skandalakis et al 1993</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib257" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_257">Romero-Torres 1998</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib226" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Pandey et al 2004</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p1305">The splenic artery usually divides into two, or occasionally three, branches before entering the splenic hilum. The superior and inferior branches are sometimes known as superior and inferior polar arteries; as they enter the hilum they divide into four or five segmental arteries, each of which supplies a segment of splenic tissue. There is relatively little arterial collateral circulation between segments, which means that occlusion of a segmental vessel often leads to infarction of part of the spleen. Segmental arteries divide within the splenic trabeculae, becoming trabecular arteries. These leave the trabeculae and give rise to central arterioles that are surrounded by thick lymphoid sheaths of white pulp. Central arterioles ramify into several penicillar arterioles that feed the sinusoids of the red pulp. There is considerable communication among arterioles (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib184" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_184">Mikhail et al 1979</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib94" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">García-Porrero and Lemes 1988</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib305" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_305">Trubel et al 1988</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib282" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_282">Sow et al 1991</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib160" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Liu et al 1996</a>).</div><section><a id="s0960"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0775">Dorsal pancreatic artery</p><div class="textfl" id="p1310">The dorsal pancreatic artery commonly arises from the initial 2<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm of the splenic artery, although it can also take origin from the common hepatic or superior mesenteric arteries or the coeliac trunk (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib121" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_121">Horiguchi et al 2008</a>). It is short and gives off numerous branches, including a terminal left branch near the inferior border of the gland. Several right-sided branches run to the head of the pancreas, passing either posterior or anterior to the superior mesenteric vein to supply the posterior or anterior surface of the head of the pancreas, respectively; they anastomose with arteries of the pancreaticoduodenal arcade (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib307" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_307">Tsutsumi et al 2014</a>). The terminal left branch anastomoses with the inferior pancreatic artery.</div><div class="text" id="p1315">The length and course of the dorsal pancreatic artery depend primarily on its site of origin. When it arises from the splenic artery, common hepatic artery or coeliac trunk, it runs inferiorly on the dorsal surface of the pancreas, whereas if it arises from the superior mesenteric artery, it runs superiorly. These variations should be taken into account during organ procurement because injury to the dorsal pancreatic artery, including at its origin, can jeopardize the pancreatic graft as a result of inadequate perfusion of the tail of the pancreas (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib13" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_13">Baranski et al 2016</a>). The artery uniformly terminates near the inferior border of the pancreas <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E78" id="pagebreak_1.464E78"></span><a id="pg1464.e76"/>close to the confluence of the splenic and superior mesenteric veins (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib26" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_26">Bertelli et al 1998</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p1320">Kirk’s arcade is formed by a right branch of the dorsal pancreatic artery that emerges on to the anterior surface of the head of the gland and anastomoses with a branch of either the gastroduodenal artery or the anterior pancreaticoduodenal arcade (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib326" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_326">Woodburne and Olsen 1951</a>). It supplies the ventral surface of the head and neck of the gland.</div><section><a id="s0965"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle0780">Inferior pancreatic artery</p><div class="textfl" id="p1325">The inferior (transverse) pancreatic artery commonly originates from the left terminal branch of the dorsal pancreatic artery. It runs to the left on the posterior surface of the gland close to its inferior border, gives multiple branches to the body and tail, and anastomoses with other pancreatic branches of the splenic artery. Occasionally the inferior pancreatic artery originates from the gastroduodenal artery or the anterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery, crossing the anterior surface of the head of the pancreas to reach the inferior border of the neck of the gland and then the tail. In such cases it may be the dominant artery to the body of the pancreas, and its injury or deliberate ligation during pancreaticoduodenectomy can cause ischaemia of the pancreas.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0970"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0785">Short gastric arteries</p><div class="textfl" id="p1330">For practical purposes, the short gastric arteries can be defined as those arteries arising above the level of the splenic artery and supplying the fundus of the stomach on its greater curvature. The short gastric arteries vary in number, commonly between five and seven. They arise from the splenic artery or its terminal divisions, or from the proximal left gastro-omental artery, and pass between the layers of the gastrosplenic ligament to supply the fundus of the stomach and cardiac orifice. They anastomose with branches of the left gastric and left gastro-omental arteries. Rarely an accessory left gastric artery arises with these vessels from the distal splenic artery.</div></section><section><a id="s0975"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0790">Left gastro-omental artery</p><div class="textfl" id="p1335">The left gastro-omental artery is the largest branch of the splenic artery. It arises near the splenic hilum and runs anteroinferiorly between the layers of the gastrosplenic ligament into the proximal gastrocolic part (gastrocolic ligament) of the greater omentum. Here, it descends between the layers of peritoneum close to the greater curvature and often anastomoses with the right gastro-omental artery. It gives off gastric branches to the fundus of the stomach through the gastrosplenic ligament, and to the body of the stomach through the gastrocolic ligament. These are necessarily longer than the gastric branches of the right gastro-omental artery and can be up to 8<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm long. Omental branches arise along the course of the vessel and descend between the layers of the greater omentum. A particularly large omental branch commonly originates close to the origin of the left gastro-omental artery, descends in the lateral portion of the greater omentum and provides a large arterial supply to this part.</div></section><section><a id="s0980"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0795">Posterior gastric artery</p><div class="textfl" id="p1340">A posterior gastric artery supplying the posterior wall of the upper part of the body of the stomach is commonly present but there has been a lack of consensus regarding its origin, course and distribution. When present, it usually arises from the splenic artery (typically from its midsection) posterior to the body of the stomach (see <a href="../B978070207705000063X/B978070207705000063X.xhtml#f0050">Fig. 63.11</a>) and ascends behind the peritoneum of the omental bursa towards the fundus to reach the posterior surface of the stomach. It can also arise from the left gastric artery or coeliac trunk (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib168" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_168">Loukas et al 2007a</a>).</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s1000"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0810">Superior mesenteric artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1360">The superior mesenteric artery is the artery of the midgut. It originates from the abdominal aorta approximately 1–2<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm below the coeliac trunk, at the level of the body of the first lumbar vertebra (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib189" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Mirjalili et al 2012b</a>) (see <a href="../B9780702077050000641/B9780702077050000641.xhtml#f0050">Figs 64.13</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000641/B9780702077050000641.xhtml#f0055">64.14</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p1365">The angle of the origin of the superior mesenteric artery from the aorta is acute (mean value 45°, range 38–60° and greater in individuals with a greater body mass index; <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib221" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_221">Ozkurt et al 2007</a>). Among the major branches of the descending aorta, the superior mesenteric artery typically has the most acute take-off angle. The result is less turbulent flow, which makes embolic events more likely than in the other visceral arterial branches of the abdominal aorta. The acuteness of the angle between the aorta and superior mesenteric artery can make intravascular cannulation via the transfemoral route somewhat difficult. The artery is usually surrounded by fat, lymphatics and neural tissue at its origin, which helps to increase the angle and the distance between it and the aorta, thereby preventing compression of the duodenum where it is crossed by the artery. The artery runs steeply downwards, anterior to the uncinate process of the pancreas and the horizontal part of the duodenum and posterior to the splenic vein and the body of the pancreas. The left renal vein lies posterior to it and separates it from the aorta (see <a href="../B9780702077050000641/B9780702077050000641.xhtml#f0120">Fig. 64.15B</a>). Within the small intestine mesentery, the superior mesenteric artery crosses anterior to the inferior vena cava, right ureter and right psoas major. Its calibre progressively decreases as successive branches are given off to the jejunum and ileum, and its terminal branch anastomoses with the termination of the ileocolic artery.</div><div class="text" id="p1370">Anatomical variations in the origin and branching pattern of the superior mesenteric artery are well described (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib325" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_325">Winston et al 2007</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib122" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_122">Horton and Fishman 2010</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib309" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Tubbs et al 2016</a>), the most common being an accessory or replaced right hepatic artery arising near the origin of the superior mesenteric artery. Present in about 15% of individuals, the accessory or replaced right hepatic artery courses posterior to the hepatic portal vein and ascends posterolateral to the bile duct (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib325" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Winston et al 2007</a>). It can be the source of the common hepatic, gastroduodenal, accessory or replaced right hepatic, accessory pancreatic, splenic or rarely the inferior mesenteric artery. Also rare is a superior mesenteric artery arising from a common coeliacomesenteric trunk (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib259" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_259">Rountas et al 2013</a>). The remnant of the omphalomesenteric artery (vitelline artery) (the embryonic artery that originally connected the intestinal circulation to the yolk sac) is usually obliterated; when present, it forms the artery supplying a congenital ileal diverticulum. It is occasionally represented in the mesentery by a fibrous strand from the termination of the superior mesenteric artery to the ileum.</div><div class="text" id="p1375">Branches from the superior mesenteric artery supply the jejunum and ileum. The arteries divide as they approach the mesenteric border of the intestine (see <a href="../B9780702077050000641/B9780702077050000641.xhtml#f0030">Fig. 64.5</a>), giving off numerous branches that extend between the muscular layers before forming a submucosal arterial plexus that supplies the mucosa. Although there is a rich anastomotic network of arteries within the intestinal mesentery, there are few anastomoses between the terminal branches close to the intestinal wall. The intramural and submucosal arterial networks consist of small-calibre vessels only. Consequently, division or occlusion of several consecutive straight arteries can produce segmental ischaemia of the intestine, while division of more proximal arterial branches in the small intestine mesentery might not cause ischaemia because of collateral flow through vascular arcades.</div><div class="text" id="p1380">The superior mesenteric artery usually gives off the inferior pancreaticoduodenal, middle colic, right colic and ileocolic arteries from its right side, and jejunal and ileal arteries from its left side. Its jejunal and ileal arteries form vascular arcades within the small intestine mesentery. The last of these arcades forms an irregular and incomplete marginal artery (of Drummond) of the small intestine. Straight arteries are given off from the most distal arcades and pass directly to the small intestine.</div><section><a id="s1010"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0815">Inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1385">An inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery is present in most individuals. It usually arises either directly from the superior mesenteric artery at the inferior border of the pancreas or as a common vessel with the first jejunal artery (a pancreaticoduodenojejunal trunk) from the posterior or left aspect of the superior mesenteric artery (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib24" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_24">Bertelli et al 1996b</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib121" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Horiguchi et al 2008</a>). It runs to the right, posterior to the superior mesenteric vein, to reach the posterior surface of the uncinate process, where it divides into anterior and posterior inferior pancreaticoduodenal arteries. The smaller anterior pancreaticoduodenal artery passes to the right, immediately inferior and then anterior to the inferior border of the head of the pancreas, and runs superiorly to anastomose with the anterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery and form the anterior pancreaticoduodenal arcade. The larger posterior branch runs posteriorly and to the right, posterior to the head of the pancreas, parallel and superior to the anterior inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery, and anastomoses with the posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery to form the posterior pancreaticoduodenal arcade (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib25" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Bertelli et al 1997</a>). Both branches supply the head of the pancreas, its uncinate process and the superior and descending parts of the duodenum. Occasionally the anterior and posterior pancreaticoduodenal arteries arise separately from the superior mesenteric or first jejunal artery. Multiple small arteries run between the anterior and posterior pancreaticoduodenal arcades, either via the pancreaticoduodenal groove or through the substance of the gland. The largest and most consistent of these is the communicating artery (sometimes known as the middle pancreaticoduodenal arcade) that passes between the pancreatic duct and accessory pancreatic duct and connects the anterior pancreaticoduodenal arterial arcade and the posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib329" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_329">Yamaguchi et al 2001</a>; see <a href="../B9780702077050000689/B9780702077050000689.xhtml#f0030">Fig. 68.6C</a>). This artery gives rise to most of the small arteries that supply the major duodenal papilla (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib191" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_191">Mirjalili and Stringer 2011</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p1390">When it arises as a pancreaticoduodenojejunal trunk, the inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery gives off a jejunal branch and then runs <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E79" id="pagebreak_1.464E79"></span><a id="pg1464.e77"/>posterior to both the superior mesenteric artery and vein before dividing into its terminal branches. The inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery is at risk of bleeding during the retroperitoneal dissection of a Whipple procedure. Occasionally it is absent and the anterior and posterior inferior pancreaticoduodenal arteries arise separately from the superior mesenteric artery.</div></section><section><a id="s1015"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0820">Jejunal branches</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1395">Usually, 4–6 jejunal branches arise from the left side of the proximal portion of the superior mesenteric artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000641/B9780702077050000641.xhtml#f0050">Figs 64.13</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000641/B9780702077050000641.xhtml#f0055">64.14</a>). They are distributed to the jejunum via 1–3 tiers of arterial arcades, the most distal of which gives rise to straight arteries. The latter run almost parallel in the mesentery before being distributed alternately to either side of the small intestine, forming two distinct ‘leaves’ of vessels within the mesentery separated by a relatively avascular plane (see <a href="../B9780702077050000641/B9780702077050000641.xhtml#f0030">Fig. 64.5A</a>). This vascular arrangement allows a dilated segment of small intestine to be bisected longitudinally and tubularized to double its length, a potentially useful technique for achieving small intestine lengthening in short bowel syndrome (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib29" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_29">Bianchi 1984</a>). Small twigs from the jejunal arteries supply regional mesenteric nodes.</div><div class="text" id="p1400">Branches from the first jejunal branch of the superior mesenteric artery supply the ascending part of the duodenum and frequently anastomose with a terminal branch of the anterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery. The ascending part of the duodenum therefore receives a potential collateral supply from the coeliac trunk and superior mesenteric artery, which means that it is not commonly affected by ischaemia.</div></section><section><a id="s1020"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0825">Ileal branches</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1405">Ileal branches are more numerous (around 8–12) and slightly smaller in calibre than jejunal branches. They arise from the left and anterior aspects of the superior mesenteric artery. The length of the mesentery from the superior mesenteric artery to the mesenteric border of the intestine is greater in the ileum, and so the branches form between two and six arcades before giving rise to multiple straight arteries that run directly towards the ileal wall (see <a href="../B9780702077050000641/B9780702077050000641.xhtml#f0045">Fig. 64.10B</a>). These branches run parallel in the mesentery and are distributed to both aspects of the ileum. They are shorter and thinner than their jejunal counterparts, particularly in the distal ileum, and do not form such distinct parallel ‘leaves’ of vessels. The terminal ileal arcades are supplied by the ileal branch of the ileocolic artery and the last ileal branch of the superior mesenteric artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000641/B9780702077050000641.xhtml#f0050">Fig. 64.13</a>). Few other vessels connect the ileocolic and superior mesenteric artery territories, and this makes surgical dissection of the ileocolic artery up to its origin relatively simple.</div></section><section><a id="s1025"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0830">Ileocolic artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1410">The ileocolic artery arises from the superior mesenteric artery near the root of the mesentery of the small intestine, descending within that mesentery to the right towards the caecum, and crossing anterior to the right ureter, gonadal vessels and psoas major. It usually divides into superior and inferior branches, the superior branch running up along the left side of the ascending colon to anastomose with the right colic artery (or right branch of the middle colic artery) (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib317" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_317">Veeresh et al 2012</a>). The inferior branch runs to the ileocaecal junction and divides into anterior and posterior caecal arteries, the appendicular artery, and an ileal branch that passes to the left in the ileal mesentery to anastomose with a terminal ileal branch of the superior mesenteric artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000653/B9780702077050000653.xhtml#f0100">Fig. 65.23</a>). The latter therefore provides a collateral arterial supply to the caecum. The ileocolic artery provides the major arterial supply to the caecum; traction on the caecum in the direction of the anterior superior iliac spine will cause the artery to tent up the mesentery, allowing the vessel to be easily identified.</div><div class="text" id="p1415">The appendicular artery usually arises directly from the ileocolic artery and descends posterior to the terminal ileum to enter the meso-appendix a short distance from the base of the appendix (see <a href="../B9780702077050000653/B9780702077050000653.xhtml#f0100">Fig. 65.23</a>). Here, it gives off a recurrent branch that anastomoses at the proximal appendix with a branch of the posterior caecal artery. The appendicular artery approaches the distal end of the organ, at first near to and then in the edge of the meso-appendix. Its terminal part lies on the wall of the appendix and can become thrombosed in appendicitis, resulting in distal gangrene or necrosis. Less commonly, the appendicular artery arises from the posterior caecal artery or an ileal artery (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib219" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_219">Ouattara et al 2007</a>) (see <a href="../B9780702077050000653/B9780702077050000653.xhtml#f0045">Fig. 65.12</a>). Accessory appendicular arteries are common; two or more arteries may supply the appendix.</div></section><section><a id="s1030"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0835">Right colic artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1420">The right colic artery is relatively small and variable in its anatomy (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib15" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_15">Batra et al 2013</a>). It usually arises as a common trunk with the middle colic artery, but can originate directly from the superior mesenteric artery or from the ileocolic artery (when it is referred to as an accessory right colic artery) (see <a href="../B9780702077050000653/B9780702077050000653.xhtml#f0105">Fig. 65.24</a>). It passes to the right, across the right psoas major and quadratus lumborum, crossing the right gonadal vessels and ureter. Near the left side of the ascending colon it divides into a descending branch, which runs down to anastomose with the superior branch of the ileocolic artery, and an ascending branch, which passes up across the inferior pole of the right kidney to the right colic flexure, where it anastomoses with a branch of the middle colic artery. Together, these anastomoses form the marginal artery at the right colic flexure.</div></section><section><a id="s1035"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0840">Middle colic artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1425">The middle colic artery arises from the right side of the superior mesenteric artery, either separately or in common with the right colic artery, just inferior to the neck of the pancreas, and passes anteriorly and superiorly within the transverse mesocolon, just to the right of the midline. As it approaches the colon, it usually divides into right and left branches. The right branch anastomoses with the ascending branch of the right colic artery. The left branch supplies the terminal part of midgut derivatives and anastomoses with a branch of the left colic artery near the left colic flexure. The marginal artery thus formed lies a few centimetres from the mesenteric edge of the transverse colon. Sometimes, the middle colic artery divides into three or more branches within the transverse mesocolon, in which case the most lateral branches form the arterial anastomoses. An accessory, or rarely a replaced, middle colic artery can arise directly from the abdominal aorta (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib332" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_332">Yoshida et al 1993</a>), dorsal pancreatic, hepatic, inferior mesenteric or left colic arteries (see <a href="../B9780702077050000653/B9780702077050000653.xhtml#f0110">Fig. 65.25</a>). In addition, an accessory middle colic artery is occasionally found arising from the superior mesenteric artery proximal to the origin of the actual middle colic artery (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib311" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_311">Turmezei and Cockburn 2009</a>).</div></section></section><section><a id="s1040"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0845">Inferior mesenteric artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1430">The inferior mesenteric artery is smaller than the superior mesenteric artery. It arises from the anterior or left anterolateral aspect of the abdominal aorta at about the level of the body of the third lumbar vertebra, 3–4<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>cm proximal to the aortic bifurcation and posterior to the inferior border of the horizontal part of the duodenum. It runs obliquely down to the linea terminalis (pelvic brim) initially anterior to and then to the left of the abdominal aorta. It gives off the left colic and sigmoid arteries and crosses the origin of the left common iliac artery medial to the ureter, with the inferior mesenteric vein lying between. Beyond the linea terminalis it continues in the root of the sigmoid mesocolon as the superior anorectal artery.</div><section><a id="s1050"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0850">Left colic artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1435">The left colic artery usually arises from the inferior mesenteric artery shortly after its origin, ascends within the left colic mesentery and divides into an ascending and a descending branch (see <a href="../B9780702077050000653/B9780702077050000653.xhtml#f0130">Figs 65.38</a>–<a href="../B9780702077050000653/B9780702077050000653.xhtml#f0135">65.39</a>). The ascending branch passes upwards across the left psoas major, gonadal vessels, ureter and left kidney, and is crossed by the inferior mesenteric vein; its terminal branches anastomose with those of the left branch of the middle colic artery within the transverse mesocolon. The descending branch passes laterally and inferiorly and anastomoses with branches from the ascending branch and the most proximal sigmoid artery to form part of the marginal artery. The arterial arcades thus formed supply the distal third of the transverse and the descending colon. The left colic artery can originate from or in common with a sigmoid artery (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib202" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_202">Murono et al 2015</a>). Occasionally an accessory, or rarely a replaced, left colic artery originates from the trunk of the superior mesenteric artery or its middle colic or first jejunal artery. When present, it runs laterally in the upper left colic mesentery just inferior to the duodenojejunal flexure to supply the proximal descending colon, and forms all or part of the marginal artery in the region of the distal transverse colon. The left colic artery can itself give rise to an accessory left middle colic artery. Occasionally it gives rise to a branch shortly after its origin, which ascends in the mesentery and anastomoses directly with a similar descending branch of the left branch of the middle colic artery (the so-called arc of Riolan; <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib316" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_316">van Gulik and Schoots 2005</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p1440">The dominant arterial supply of the left colic flexure is usually from the left colic artery but can be from the left branch of the middle colic artery. The marginal artery in this region may be absent or small, but it can enlarge considerably if the inferior mesenteric artery is stenosed or occluded.</div><section><a id="s1055"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0855">Vascular ligation in left colonic resections</p><div class="textfl" id="p1445">During resection of the distal descending and sigmoid colon, ligation of the inferior mesenteric artery close to its origin preserves the bifurcation of the left colic artery and helps to maintain the arterial supply to the proximal descending colon via the anastomosis between the left <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E80" id="pagebreak_1.464E80"></span><a id="pg1464.e78"/>branch of the middle colic artery and the ascending branch of the left colic artery. Ligation of the left colic artery close to its bifurcation can interfere with this supply and render the proximal descending colon ischaemic. Similarly, if the inferior mesenteric vein is ligated, then the bifurcation of the left colic vein forms the route of venous drainage from the proximal descending colon to the middle colic vein.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1060"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0860">Sigmoid arteries</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1450">The inferior mesenteric artery gives rise to between two and five sigmoid arteries, which descend obliquely in the sigmoid mesocolon anterior to the left psoas major, ureter and gonadal vessels. They supply the distal descending colon and sigmoid colon and anastomose superiorly with the left colic artery and inferiorly with the superior anorectal artery. Unlike the arrangement in the small intestine, arterial arcades do not form until the arteries are close to the wall of the colon, when small branches arise to supply the sigmoid colon directly. A true marginal artery is less obvious in the sigmoid colon. There is often a significant interval in the mesentery between the highest sigmoid artery and the descending branch of the left colic artery; this forms a useful guide to the arterial territories during surgical dissection.</div></section><section><a id="s1065"/><h6 class="h5hd" id="cesectitle0865">Superior anorectal artery</h6><div class="textfl" id="p1455">The principal arterial supply to the upper two-thirds of the rectum is via the superior anorectal artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000653/B9780702077050000653.xhtml#f0145">Fig. 65.41</a>). The inferior mesenteric artery crosses the left common iliac vessels medial to the ureter and descends in the medial limb of the sigmoid mesocolon, straddled by the hypogastric nerves on either side. As it crosses the linea terminalis it becomes the superior anorectal artery. At the level of the third sacral vertebra, where the rectum begins, the artery enters the proximal mesorectum in the midline and divides into two branches that descend, initially posterolaterally and then on each side of the rectum. Terminal branches pierce the rectal wall and anastomose with branches of the middle rectal and inferior anorectal arteries within the rectal submucosa.</div><div class="text" id="p1460">The middle anorectal arteries arise from the internal pudendal, inferior gluteal, internal iliac arteries and less frequently from other internal iliac artery branches (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib72" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_72">DiDio et al 1986</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib32" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_32">Bilhim et al 2013</a>). When present, they enter the mesorectum anterolaterally in the ‘lateral ligaments’ and provide some additional supply to the middle third of the rectum.</div></section></section><section><a id="s0985"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0800">Inferior phrenic artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1345">The inferior phrenic arteries usually arise either from the aorta, just superior to the level of the coeliac trunk, or directly from the coeliac trunk; occasionally, they originate from the renal artery (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib166" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_166">Loukas et al 2005a</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib110" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_110">Gwon et al 2007</a>). They contribute to the arterial supply of the respiratory diaphragm. Each artery ascends laterally, anterior to the crus of the respiratory diaphragm, near the medial border of the ipsilateral suprarenal gland and then divides into an ascending and a descending branch. The left ascending branch passes behind the oesophagus and runs anteriorly on the left side of the oesophageal hiatus, where it bifurcates; one branch curves anteriorly to anastomose with its counterpart anterior to the central tendon of the respiratory diaphragm and the other approaches the thoracic wall to anastomose with the musculophrenic and pericardiacophrenic arteries. The right ascending branch passes posterior to the inferior vena cava and then bifurcates; one branch runs anteriorly on the right side of the caval foramen before anastomosing with its counterpart anterior to the central tendon of the respiratory diaphragm, and the other passes laterally on the inferior surface of the diaphragm. The descending branches on each side supply the respiratory diaphragm and anastomose with the lower posterior intercostal and musculophrenic arteries. Each inferior phrenic artery gives off two or three small superior suprarenal arteries. The abdominal part of the oesophagus, fibrous capsule of the liver and the superior border of the spleen may also receive small arterial twigs from this vessel.</div><div class="text" id="p1350">The inferior phrenic artery may be a source of significant collateral blood flow to large hepatocellular cancers and is sometimes specifically occluded, along with the relevant hepatic artery, when such tumours are treated by arterial embolization.</div><section><a id="s9995"/><section><a id="s0995"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0805">Superior suprarenal artery</p><div class="textfl" id="p1355">The superior suprarenal artery usually arises from the ipsilateral inferior phrenic artery and passes to the gland as four or five small branches. It occasionally arises from the abdominal aorta.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s1070"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0870">Middle suprarenal arteries</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1465">The right and left middle suprarenal arteries often arise from the lateral aspect of the abdominal aorta at around the level of the superior mesenteric artery and ascend slightly over the crura of the respiratory diaphragm to anastomose with the suprarenal branches of the ipsilateral inferior phrenic and renal arteries (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib301" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_301">Toni et al 1988</a>): each is usually single, but can be multiple or absent. The right middle suprarenal artery passes posterior to the inferior vena cava near the right coeliac ganglion. The left middle suprarenal artery passes close to the left coeliac ganglion, splenic artery and the superior border of the pancreas. The middle suprarenal arteries can originate from either the ipsilateral inferior phrenic or renal artery.</div></section><section><a id="s1075"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0875">Renal artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1470">The paired renal arteries take about 20% of the cardiac output to supply organs that represent less than 1% of total body weight. They branch laterally from the aorta at right-angles just below the origin of the superior mesenteric artery (see <a href="../B9780702077050000598/B9780702077050000598.xhtml#f0060">Figs 59.5A</a>, <a href="../B978070207705000077X/B978070207705000077X.xhtml#f0055">72.10A</a>). Both cross the corresponding crus of the respiratory diaphragm. The right renal artery is longer and often slightly higher, passing posterior to the inferior vena cava, right renal vein, head of the pancreas, and descending part of the duodenum. The left renal artery is often a little lower and passes behind the left renal vein, the body of the pancreas and the splenic vein. It may be crossed anteriorly by the inferior mesenteric vein.</div><div class="text" id="p1475">A single renal artery to each kidney is present in approximately 70% of individuals (see <a href="../B9780702077050000720/B9780702077050000720.xhtml#f0045">Fig. 72.11</a>). The arteries vary in their level of origin and in their calibre, obliquity and precise relations. In its extrarenal course, each renal artery gives off one or more inferior suprarenal arteries, ureteric and capsular branches, and branches that supply perirenal tissue and the renal pelvis. Near the hilum of the kidney, each artery divides into an anterior and a posterior branch, and these divide into segmental arteries supplying the renal vascular segments. Accessory renal arteries are common (in approximately 30% of individuals) and usually arise from the abdominal aorta above or below (most commonly below) the renal artery and follow it to the hilum (see <a href="../B9780702077050000720/B9780702077050000720.xhtml#f0040">Fig. 72.10B–D</a>). Accessory vessels to the inferior pole cross anterior to the ureter and can, by obstructing the ureter, cause hydronephrosis. In children with ureteropelvic junction obstruction, a crossing vessel is found in 28% of cases (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib319" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_319">Veyrac et al 2003</a>). Three anatomical variants of aberrant lower pole crossing vessels have been described: either anterior to the dilated renal pelvis or ureteropelvic junction, or inferior to the ureteropelvic junction, causing kinking of the ureter (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib270" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_270">Schneider et al 2013</a>). Rarely accessory renal arteries arise from the coeliac or superior mesenteric arteries near the aortic bifurcation, or from the common iliac arteries.</div><div class="text" id="p1480">The subdivisions of the renal arteries are described sequentially as segmental, lobar, interlobar, arcuate and interlobular (cortical radiate) arteries, and afferent and efferent glomerular arterioles (see <a href="../B9780702077050000720/B9780702077050000720.xhtml#f0050">Fig. 72.13</a>).</div><section><a id="s9085"/><section><a id="s1085"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0880">Segmental arteries</p><div class="textfl" id="p1485">Renal vascular segmentation was originally recognized by John Hunter in 1794, but the first detailed account of the primary pattern was produced in the 1950s from casts and radiographs of injected kidneys. Five arterial segments of the kidney have been identified (see <a href="../B9780702077050000720/B9780702077050000720.xhtml#f0055">Fig. 72.14</a>). The superior segment occupies the anteromedial region of the superior pole. The anterior superior segment includes the rest of the superior pole and the central anterosuperior region. The inferior segment encompasses the whole inferior pole. The anterior inferior segment lies between the anterior and inferior segments. The posterior segment includes the whole posterior region between the superior and inferior segments. This is the pattern most commonly seen, and although there can be considerable variation, it is the pattern that clinicians most frequently encounter when performing partial nephrectomy. Recent anatomical and radiological analyses have suggested that there could be up to nine arterial segments for each kidney (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib174" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_174">Macchi et al 2019</a>). Whatever pattern is present, it is important to emphasize that vascular segments are supplied by virtual end arteries. In contrast, the larger intrarenal veins have no segmental organization and anastomose freely.</div><div class="text" id="p1490">Brödel described a relatively avascular longitudinal zone (the ‘bloodless’ line of Brödel) along the convex renal border, which was proposed as the most suitable site for surgical incision (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib39" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_39">Brödel 1911</a>). However, many vessels cross this zone and it is far from ‘bloodless’; planned radial or intersegmental incisions are therefore preferable (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib173" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_173">Macchi et al 2018</a>). Knowledge of the vascular anatomy of the kidney is important when partial nephrectomy is undertaken for renal cell carcinoma. In this surgery, the branches of the renal artery are defined so that the surgeon can safely excise the tumour while not compromising the vascular supply to the remaining renal tissue (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib210" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_210">Novick 1998</a>).</div></section><section><a id="s1090"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0885">Lobar, interlobar, arcuate and interlobular arteries</p><div class="textfl" id="p1495">The initial branches of segmental arteries are lobar, usually one to each renal pyramid. Before reaching the renal pyramid they subdivide into <span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1.464E81" id="pagebreak_1.464E81"></span><a id="pg1464.e79"/>two or three interlobar arteries, extending towards the cortex around each pyramid. At the junction of the renal cortex and medulla, interlobar arteries dichotomize into arcuate arteries, which diverge at right angles. As they arch between the renal cortex and medulla, each divides further, ultimately supplying interlobular arteries that diverge radially into the cortex. The terminations of adjacent arcuate arteries do not anastomose but end in the renal cortex as additional interlobular arteries. Though most interlobular arteries come from arcuate branches, some arise directly from arcuate, or even terminal, interlobar arteries (see <a href="../B9780702077050000720/B9780702077050000720.xhtml#f0050">Fig. 72.13</a>). Interlobular arteries ascend towards the superficial cortex or can branch occasionally en route. Some are more tortuous and recurve towards the renal medulla at least once before proceeding towards the renal surface. Others traverse the surface as perforating arteries to anastomose with the capsular plexus (which is also supplied from the inferior suprarenal, renal and gonadal arteries).</div><section><a id="s1095"/><p class="h7hd" id="cesectitle0890">Afferent and efferent glomerular arterioles</p><div class="textfl" id="p1500">Afferent glomerular arterioles are mainly the lateral rami of interlobular arteries. A few arise from arcuate and interlobar arteries when they vary their direction and angle of origin: deeper ones incline obliquely back towards the renal medulla, the intermediate pass horizontally, and the more superficial approach the surface of the kidney obliquely before ending in a glomerulus (see <a href="../B9780702077050000720/B9780702077050000720.xhtml#f0050">Fig. 72.13</a>). Efferent glomerular arterioles from most glomeruli (except at juxtamedullary and, sometimes, intermediate cortical levels) soon divide to form a dense peritubular capillary plexus around the proximal and distal convoluted tubules; there are therefore two sets of capillaries – glomerular and peritubular – in series in the main renal cortical circulation, linked by efferent glomerular arterioles. The vascular supply of the renal medulla is largely from efferent arterioles of juxtamedullary glomeruli, supplemented by some from more superficial glomeruli, and ‘aglomerular’ arterioles (probably from degenerated glomeruli). Efferent glomerular arterioles passing into the renal medulla are relatively long, wide vessels, and contribute side branches to neighbouring capillary plexuses before entering the renal medulla, where each divides into 12–25 descending vasa recta. As their name suggests, these run straight to various depths in the renal medulla, contributing side branches to a radially elongated capillary plexus applied to the descending and ascending limbs of renal loops and to collecting ducts. The venous ends of capillaries converge to the ascending vasa recta, which drain into arcuate or interlobular veins. An essential feature of the vasa recta (particularly in the outer medulla) is that both descending and ascending vessels are grouped into vascular bundles, within which the external aspects of both types are closely apposed, bringing them close to the limbs of the nephron loops (of Henle) and collecting ducts. As these bundles converge centrally into the renal medulla, they contain fewer vessels; some terminate at successive levels in neighbouring capillary plexuses. This proximity of descending and ascending vessels to each other and to adjacent collecting ducts provides the structural basis for the countercurrent exchange and multiplier phenomena (see <a href="../B9780702077050000720/B9780702077050000720.xhtml#f0060">Fig. 72.15</a>). These complex renal vascular patterns show regional specializations that are closely adapted to the spatial organization and functions of renal corpuscles, tubules and ducts (see below).</div><div class="text" id="p1505">The renal arteries are two of the largest branches of the abdominal aorta and arise laterally just inferior to the origin of the superior mesenteric artery at about the level of the body of the first lumbar vertebra (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib189" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Mirjalili et al 2012b</a>). When the arteries arise at different cranio-caudal levels, the right ostium is usually superior to the left. The right renal artery is longer and passes posterior to the inferior vena cava, right renal vein, head of the pancreas and descending part of the duodenum. The left renal artery passes behind the left renal vein, the body of the pancreas and the splenic vein. Variations in the number, origin, course and branching patterns of the renal arteries are common.</div></section></section><section><a id="s1100"/><p class="h6hd" id="cesectitle0895">Inferior suprarenal arteries</p><div class="textfl" id="p1510">The inferior suprarenal arteries often contribute most of the arterial supply to the suprarenal gland. One or two arteries usually arise from the ipsilateral renal artery, but the inferior suprarenal arteries can originate from either the abdominal aorta or the ipsilateral gonadal artery.</div></section></section></section><section><a id="s1105"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0900">Testicular artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1515">The testicular artery usually arises from the abdominal aorta, inferior to the origin of the renal artery, and courses inferolaterally under the parietal peritoneum, along psoas major towards the pelvis. On the right, it courses anterior to the inferior vena cava and posterior to the middle colic and ileocolic arteries and the terminal ileum. On the left, it courses posterior to the inferior mesenteric vein, left colic artery and the descending colon. As the right and left testicular arteries enter the pelvis they lie anterior to the genitofemoral nerves, ureters and external iliac arteries. Both arteries then enter the deep inguinal ring and travel within the ipsilateral spermatic cord in the inguinal canal to the scrotum (see <a href="../B9780702077050000744/B9780702077050000744.xhtml#f0010">Figs 74.2</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000744/B9780702077050000744.xhtml#f0025">74.5</a>). The origin, number and course of the testicular arteries can vary (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib8" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_8">Asala et al 2001</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib223" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_223">Pai et al 2008</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib150" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_150">Kotian et al 2016</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib139" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_139">Kayalvizhi et al 2017</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p1520">Proximally, the testicular artery supplies the upper and middle parts of the ureter (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib63" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_63">Daniel and Shackman 1952</a>). Distally, in its course to the testis the testicular artery gives off one or more internal testicular arteries (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib175" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_175">MacLennan 2012</a>), an inferior testicular artery and branches supplying the head, body and tail of the epididymis (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib176" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_176">Macmillan 1954</a>). The level at which this branching occurs is variable; in 31–88% of cases it occurs within the inguinal canal (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib17" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_17">Beck et al 1992</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib131" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_131">Jarow et al 1992</a>). At the level of the testis, branches of the testicular artery enter the tunica albuginea in the mediastinum of the testis and ramify in the vascular layer before reaching their distribution. The testicular arteries ramify primarily in the anterior, medial and lateral portions of the inferior pole of the testis and in the anterior segment of the superior pole (<a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib130" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_130">Jarow 1991</a>, <a href="../B9780702077050000811/B9780702077050000811_bib.xhtml#bib195" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_195">Mostafa et al 2008</a>), which has important implications for planning testicular biopsies.</div></section><section><a id="s1110"/><h5 class="h4hd" id="cesectitle0905">Ovarian artery</h5><div class="textfl" id="p1525">The ovarian artery originates below the renal artery and descends behind the peritoneum, crossing the external iliac artery and vein at the linea terminalis to enter the lesser pelvis. Here, the artery turns medially in the suspensory ligament of the ovary and splits into a branch to the mesovarium that supplies the ovary and a branch that continues into the broad ligament, below the uterine tube, and supplies the tube. There are variations in the site of the division to the ovary and tube (see <a href="../B9780702077050000756/B9780702077050000756.xhtml#f0110">Fig. 75.21</a>). On each side a branch passes lateral to the uterus to unite with the uterine artery. Other branches accompany the round ligaments through the inguinal canal to the skin of the labium majus and the inguinal region. Early in intrauterine life, the ovaries flank the vertebral column inferior to the kidneys and so the ovarian arteries are relatively short; they gradually lengthen as the ovaries descend into the pelvis.</div></section></section></section></section></body></html>