<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html lang="EN" xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head><meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/><title>Gray's Anatomy</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../Style/Elsevier_eBook.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" media="only screen" href="../../Style/media.css"/></head><body><section role="doc-chapter" epub:type="chapter"><div id="CN"><a id="c0095"/></div><h1 class="chaptitle" epub:type="title" id="B9780702077050000951">Commentary 9.1: Functional anatomy and biomechanics of the pelvis</h1><address><div class="chapau" id="augrp0010">Andry Vleeming, and Frank H. Willard</div></address><section><div class="textfl" id="p0010">This commentary focuses on the anatomy and biomechanics of the pelvic girdle and, specifically, the sacroiliac joints. In bipeds, the pelvis serves as a basic platform with three large levers acting on it (the spine and two lower limbs). Movement of the pelvic platform upon the hip joints relative to the femur, such as flexion and extension (pelvic ante- and retroversion), and rotation and abduction/adduction, strongly influences lumbar spinal movement. As well as this substantial external pelvic motion, internal pelvic motion through the sacroiliac joint is essential for effectively transferring loads between the spine and lower limbs. It has been postulated that the sacroiliac joints act as important stress relievers in the ‘force–motion’ relationships between the trunk and lower limb (<a href="#bib10" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_10">Vleeming et al 2007</a>). These joints ensure that the pelvic girdle is a flexible ring of bone that will not easily fracture under the great forces to which it might be subject, either from trauma or from its many bipedal functions (<a href="#bib4" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_4">Lovejoy 1988</a>). Analysis of gait mechanics demonstrates that the sacroiliac joints provide sufficient flexibility for the intrapelvic forces to be transferred effectively to and from the lumbar spine and lower extremities (<a href="#bib10" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Vleeming et al 2007</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0015">The sacroiliac joint is a highly specialized joint that lends stable (yet flexible) support to the upper body. Both the tightness of the well-developed dorsal fibrous apparatus and the specific architecture of the sacroiliac joint result in limited mobility. Numerous researchers have tried to model sacroiliac joint function by studying its principal displacement characteristics. A common assumption of these studies is that increased loading on the sacrum leads to tilting of the sacrum ventrally (nutation), a process by which most dorsal sacroiliac joint ligaments are stretched and the dorsal aspects of the iliac bones are drawn together (<a href="#bib6" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_6">Solonen 1957</a>, <a href="#bib8" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_8">Vleeming et al 1990a</a>, <a href="#bib9" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_9">Vleeming et al 1990b</a>). Counternutation normally takes place in unloaded situations, such as lying. Nutation implies a forward tilting of the sacrum relative to a posterior rotation of the ilia, and vice versa in counternutation.</div><section><a id="s0010"/><section><a id="s0015"/><h2 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle0010">Sacroiliac joint movement</h2><div class="textfl" id="p0020">Pelvic motion of males and females has been investigated by roentgen stereophotogrammetric motion analysis (RSA). RSA is a technique for measuring small movements and is regarded as the gold standard for determining mobility in orthopaedics (<a href="#bib3" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_3">Kibsgård et al 2012</a>). It has been used to measure the mean sacroiliac joint mobility, especially around the sagittal axis, in patients with pelvic girdle pain (PGP; <a href="#bib7" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_7">Sturesson 2007</a>). The average mobility for males was about 40% less than for females. However, there was no detectable decrease in total mobility in either gender with age (in patients up to 50 years old). In fact, there was a significant increase of mobility with age for both moving from a ‘supine to sitting position’ and from ‘standing to lying prone with hyperextension’ position, particularly in females. Likewise, gender differences of symphysial motion were analysed in a group of 45 asymptomatic individuals. In males, the average frontal plane movement was 1.4<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm, and in nulliparous females 1.6<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm. However, in multiparous females, motion increased to 3.1<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm (<a href="#bib2" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_2">Garras et al 2008</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0025">The increased sacroiliac joint mobility in females compared to males has possible anatomical correlates. The curvature of the sacroiliac joint surfaces is usually less pronounced in females to allow for greater mobility (<a href="#bib8" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Vleeming et al 1990a</a>). Also, the pubic angle differs between males and females (<a href="#bib12" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_12">Vleeming et al 2012</a>). The increase in mobility of the pelvic ring seen in the post-pubescent female pelvis is functional in allowing passage for the child during labour. When the data are combined from published studies employing RSA and appropriate placing of markers, the maximum sagittal rotation of the sacroiliac joint never exceeds 3.6° and translation of the joint never exceeds 2<span style=" padding-top:0.3em; padding-left:0.2em" title="hsp=&#34;0.2&#34;"><span style="font-size:0pt"> </span></span>mm (<a href="#bib3" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Kibsgård et al 2012</a>). If these data are amalgamated with the observation that osteophytosis is rare in females, regardless of age (1.83% of females), and is not very common in males (12.27%; <a href="#bib1" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_1">Dar et al 2008</a>), it appears that small sacroiliac joint movements are present, even at an advanced age (<a href="#bib12" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Vleeming et al 2012</a>).</div><section><a id="s0020"/><h3 class="h3hd" id="cesectitle0015">Sacroiliac joint stability</h3><div class="textfl" id="p0030">To illustrate the importance of both myofascial and ligamentous stability of the sacroiliac joint, the biomechanical principles of form and force closure were introduced (<a href="#bib8" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Vleeming et al 1990a</a>, <a href="#bib9" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Vleeming et al 1990b</a>). Form closure refers to a theoretical stable situation in a joint with closely fitting surfaces, where no extra forces are needed to maintain the state of the system. With force closure (leading to joint compression), both a lateral force and friction are needed to withstand vertical load. The structural features that contribute to sacroiliac joint form closure are complementary ridges and grooves of the articular surfaces; dorsocranial ‘wedging’ of the sacrum into the ilia; a particular high coefficient of friction in the sacroiliac joint (<a href="#bib8" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Vleeming et al 1990a</a>, <a href="#bib9" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Vleeming et al 1990b</a>); and the integrity of the dorsal binding ligaments in particular, which are among the strongest in the body (<a href="#bib8" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Vleeming et al 1990a</a>). Both form and force closure are necessary for balancing friction/compression in the sacroiliac joint. Force closure is the result of altered joint reaction forces by tensing ligaments, fasciae, muscles and ground reaction forces (<a href="#bib8" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Vleeming et al 1990a</a>, <a href="#bib9" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Vleeming et al 1990b</a>). Force closure ideally generates a perpendicular compressional reaction force to the sacroiliac joint to overcome the forces of gravity (<a href="#bib9" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Vleeming et al 1990b</a>).</div></section></section><section><a id="s0025"/><h3 class="h2hd" id="cesectitle0020">Biomechanical considerations and the active straight leg raise test in pelvic girdle pain patients</h3><div class="textfl" id="p0035">PGP patients, who test positively on the functional active straight leg raise test, show an inability to raise the leg while lying supine. This test can temporarily be normalized by manual anterior compression of the pelvis or the use of a pelvic belt. This suggests that increased unilateral motion of the sacroiliac joint could lead to impairment and failure to lift the leg (<a href="#bib5" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_5">Mens et al 1999</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0040">Likewise, <a href="#bib7" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Sturesson (2007)</a>, using RSA, studied the effects of surgical application of an anterior external fixation frame for severe PGP patients. This resulted in a mean reduction of movement of the sacroiliac joint around the helical axis of 59% and around the X-axis of 74%. In addition, the active straight leg raise test and other evidence-based PGP tests were normalized (<a href="#bib11" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref" id="bib_11">Vleeming et al 2008</a>). When the frame was tightened, a nutation movement of the sacrum was noticed (<a href="#bib7" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Sturesson 2007</a>).</div><div class="text" id="p0045">This and other studies mentioned in this brief commentary imply that ‘too much movement’ of the sacroiliac joint could be a significant factor in the onset of PGP (<a href="#bib11" role="doc-noteref" epub:type="noteref">Vleeming et al 2008</a>).</div></section></section></section><footer><section role="doc-bibliography" epub:type="bibliography"><a id="cebib0010"/><h2 class="reftitle" id="s0030">References</h2><section role="doc-bibliography" epub:type="bibliography"><a id="cebibsec0010"/><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib1"><!--<a hreef="#bib_1">1</a>. --><a id="ref0010"/><a href="#bib_1">Dar</a> G, Khamis S, Peleg S, et al. <cite>Sacroiliac joint fusion and the implications for manual therapy diagnosis and treatment</cite>. <cite><i>Man Ther</i></cite>. 2008;13:155–158.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib2"><!--<a hreef="#bib_2">2</a>. --><a id="ref0015"/><a href="#bib_2">Garras</a> D.N, Carothers J.T, Olson S.A. <cite>Single-leg-stance (flamingo) radiographs to assess pelvic instability: how much motion is normal?</cite> <cite><i>J Bone Joint Surg Am</i></cite>. 2008;90:2114–2118.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib3"><!--<a hreef="#bib_3">3</a>. --><a id="ref0020"/><a href="#bib_3">Kibsgård</a> T.J, Røise O, Stuge B, et al. <cite>Precision and accuracy measurement of radiostereometric analysis applied to movement of the sacro-iliac joint</cite>. <cite><i>Clin Orthop Relat Res</i></cite>. 2012;470:3187–3194.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib4"><!--<a hreef="#bib_4">4</a>. --><a id="ref0025"/><a href="#bib_4">Lovejoy</a> C.O. <cite>Evolution of human walking</cite>. <cite><i>Sci Am</i></cite>. 1988;25 118–25A.</p><div><span role="doc-pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1464.e4" id="pagebreak_1464.e4"/></div><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib5"><!--<a hreef="#bib_5">5</a>. --><a id="ref0030"/><a href="#bib_5">Mens</a> J.M, Vleeming A, Snijders C.J, et al. <cite>The active straight leg raising test and mobility of the pelvic joints</cite>. <cite><i>Eur Spine J</i></cite>. 1999;8:468–473.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib6"><!--<a hreef="#bib_6">6</a>. --><a id="ref0035"/><a href="#bib_6">Solonen</a> K.A. <cite>The sacroiliac joint in the light of anatomical, roentgenological and clinical studies</cite>. <cite><i>Acta Orthop Scand</i></cite>. 1957;27:1–127.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib7"><!--<a hreef="#bib_7">7</a>. --><a id="ref0040"/><a href="#bib_7">Sturesson</a> B. <cite>Movement of the sacroiliac joint with special reference to the effect of load</cite>. In: Vleeming A, Mooney V, Stoeckart R, eds. <cite><i>Movement, Stability and Lumbopelvic Pain: Integration of Research and Therapy</i></cite>. 2nd ed. Edinburgh: Elsevier, Churchill Livingstone; 2007:343–352.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib8"><!--<a hreef="#bib_8">8</a>. --><a id="ref0045"/><a href="#bib_8">Vleeming</a> A, Stoeckart R, Volkers A.C, et al. <cite>Relation between form and function in the sacroiliac joint. Part I: Clinical anatomical aspects</cite>. <cite><i>Spine</i></cite>. 1990;15:130–132.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib9"><!--<a hreef="#bib_9">9</a>. --><a id="ref0050"/><a href="#bib_9">Vleeming</a> A, Volkers A.C, Snijders C.J, et al. <cite>Relation between form and function in the sacroiliac joint. Part II: Biomechanical aspects</cite>. <cite><i>Spine</i></cite>. 1990;15:133–136.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib10"><!--<a hreef="#bib_10">10</a>. --><a id="ref0055"/><a href="#bib_10">Vleeming</a> A, Mooney V, Stoeckart R, eds. <cite><i>Movement</i></cite>. 2nd ed. <cite><i>Stability and Lumbopelvic Pain: Integration of Research and Therapy</i></cite>. Edinburgh: Elsevier, Churchill Livingstone; 2007:658.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib11"><!--<a hreef="#bib_11">11</a>. --><a id="ref0060"/><a href="#bib_11">Vleeming</a> A, Albert H.B, Ostgaard H.C, et al. <cite>European guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of pelvic girdle pain</cite>. <cite><i>Eur Spine J</i></cite>. 2008;17:794–819.</p><p class="biblio" role="doc-biblioentry" epub:type="biblioentry footnote" id="bib12"><!--<a hreef="#bib_12">12</a>. --><a id="ref0065"/><a href="#bib_12">Vleeming</a> A, Schuenke M.D, Masi A.T, et al. <cite>The sacroiliac joint: an overview of its anatomy, function and potential clinical implications</cite>. <cite><i>J Anat</i></cite>. 2012;221:537–567.</p></section></section></footer></section></body></html>